Chapter 22

THE COLD WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION AFTER THE SECOND WORLD WAR

108. The Cold Wan The Opening Decade, 1945-1955

109. Western Europe: Economic Reconstruction

110. Western Europe: Political Reconstruction

111. Reshaping the Global Economy

112. The Communist World: The U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe

113. The Communist World: Mao Zedong and the People's Republic of China

Every age has its share of social conflicts, economic problems, political upheavals, wars, and cultural changes, but the first half of the twentieth century must surely be ranked as one of the most deadly and disorienting periods that people have ever known. During these decades, over the course of a single lifetime, the world passed through the Great War of 1914-1918, a global influenza pandemic (which killed at least 50 million people), the collapse of longstanding dynasties in Europe and the Middle East, the Russian Revolution, a worldwide economic depression, the rise of aggressive fascist and Nazi dictatorships, the Second World War (stretching from Europe and North Africa to all of east and southeast Asia), the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe, the first use of atomic bombs, the rise of Communist China, and the breakup of the Ottoman and European empires into new nations in the eastern Mediterranean and South Asia.

These events brought massive disruptions to individual lives, caused more millions of deaths than can ever be accurately counted, and produced far-reaching changes in global political and economic systems—including the rapid, international ascendancy of the United States and a steady decline in Europe’s previous control over people or economies in much of the non-European world. In short, the upheavals of the early twentieth century profoundly transformed the course of modern world history. Yet people everywhere, like their ancestors after earlier upheavals, moved on from these cataclysms to rebuild their lives, their societies, their political institutions, and their economic activities. History did not end, of course, and the age-old resilience of human beings and their cultures appeared again in the decades that followed the Second World War.

The end of that titanic war marks a transition for historians as well as for the people who lived through it, because the decades after 1945 or 1950 are the beginning of what historians usually call “contemporary history.” Although the postwar era is increasingly distant from our own time, the historical consequences of many events and changes since the Second World War are still evolving and are still part of our contemporary world. Contemporary history arouses strong feelings, leads to many of the world’s current conflicts, and directly shapes the experiences and attitudes of most people who are now alive. For historians, the complexities of contemporary history can pose even more challenges than those of earlier eras, because many sources are still unavailable, or because present-day conflicts distort historical perspectives, or because the lasting influence of recent events cannot yet be known. These distinctive, open-ended aspects of contemporary history will begin to emerge in this chapter and those that follow as we examine the unsettled events and trends of the contemporary world, which continues to evolve more rapidly and in more ways than any historical narrative can describe with the long-range perspectives of historical analysis.

108. THE COLD WAR: THE OPENING DECADE, 1945-1955

Certain issues that had confronted humankind for over a century became even more complex and more urgent in the second half of the twentieth century. Three can be singled out: science, the organization of industrial society, and national sovereignty.

The atomic bomb dramatized the new problem of science. The world shuddered at the instantaneous destruction of Hiroshima. The postwar contest to produce more sophisticated nuclear weapons spurred the realization that a third world war would be unthinkable. Human beings now possessed the means to annihilate not only civilization but even human existence on the planet, a thought especially shocking to a world that set one of its highest values on scientific progress.

Science, and its partner, invention, had for a long time transformed both industry and war. It had conquered many of the dreaded plagues and diseases of the world. Everyone had long known that science could be applied either constructively or destructively. It was the magnitude of the new destructive possibilities that now made thoughtful people worry. Scientists themselves, after the first atomic explosion, affirmed the need for a moral regeneration. They insisted that science was neutral, free from blame for the horrors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, that the trouble lay not with science but with the uses to which scientific knowledge was put.

The problem of organizing industrial society was also unresolved after 1945. There were in theory two opposite social poles. At one, best represented by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (until its demise in 1991), all capital was owned by the state and supplied to managers and workers as needed, and all production and interchange were planned in advance by public authorities. In the Soviet form of socialism (as well as in the People’s Republic of China after 1949), which the outside world called communism because it had come about through revolution and been maintained through dictatorship, the government’s role was all-encompassing. At the other pole, best exemplified by the United States, economic exchange took place through the mechanism of the market, and capital was owned by private persons who chose the channels of investment and determined the availability of jobs. Neither the socialist nor the capitalist system was pure in practice, and even in capitalist countries mixed economies became the rule, with varying degrees of government intervention. The chief drawback in the Soviet system was the lack of political and economic freedom and its stifling of individual initiative; in the American system, its periodic economic crises and its threats to the economic security of individual workers. In the years after the Second World War, Americans expended a good deal more effort trying to correct the lack of economic security than the Soviets did to correct the lack of freedom.

Another postwar question hinged on the unity of the modern world. It was indisputably one world in the sense that there existed a close-knit, interdependent economy, that political events and environmental changes affected the whole globe, and that world cultures and religions interacted as never before. But it was far from homogeneous. All admired the steam turbine and stood in awe of nuclear fission, but beyond the material level schemes of values diverged. No people wished to be subordinated to another, or to an international body, or to lose its way of life in a uniform global civilization.

After the Second World War, as after the First, an international organization was set up to prevent war in the future. A conference of all anti-Axis powers, held at San Francisco in 1945, founded the United Nations (UN) and drew up its charter. The new organization was designed to maintain international peace and security and to encourage cooperative solutions to international problems. Although it was widely acknowledged that peace would depend primarily on the Great Powers, all states, regardless of size, would be represented. Two agencies were central. The General Assembly was a deliberative body in which all member states, however small, had an equal vote. The Security Council, whose primary responsibility was to preserve peace, consisted of the five Great Powers, who were to be permanent members, and ten rotating members chosen for two-year terms. Apart from the two superpowers, the United States and the U.S.S.R., it was not easy to define the Great Powers in 1945, but the permanent seats were assigned to the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, France, and China.[1]

[1] Nationalist China (the Republic of China, or Taiwan) occupied the seat until 1971, when the People’s Republic of China (Communist China) replaced it. By the early twenty-first century there were growing demands to expand the number of permanent seats on the Security Council by adding other large nations from Asia, Africa, and Latin America.

Each permanent member had a veto power. Thus the Security Council could act on important matters only if the Great Powers were unanimous. Although widely criticized, the veto was accepted as necessary. In major crises the agreement of the Great Powers would be needed to maintain world peace. The U.S.S.R. demanded the veto most frankly, but the United States would not have joined without this safeguard. In the following years, however, even small countries refused to abide by judgments of the United Nations. No nation, large or small, was yet willing to forgo its independence or subordinate itself to an international body with the authority to put down violence, but there was much hope, and even confidence, that the authority and prestige of the UN would grow with time.

The United Nations had 51 original members. To symbolize the strong American commitment (and the contrast with America’s earlier refusal to join the League of Nations), its headquarters was located in New York. The charter provided for the admission of new members, including the former Axis countries and their satellites, and also wartime neutrals, so that it could be truly international. From 1947 to 1955 a few additional states were admitted; in 1955, 16 more; and in the next several decades, after decolonization and other changes, the organization expanded so that by 2005 it counted over 190 members. In 1948, in good part because of the persuasive powers of the American delegate Eleanor Roosevelt, it adopted a sweeping Declaration of Universal Rights, but left unanswered the means of implementing it.

The United Nations and its Security Council failed to fulfill the role projected for it in the early postwar era because of the tensions between the American-led Western powers and the Soviets. Although the UN remained one of the few arenas where the Americans and Soviets could meet and debate, it was powerless to prevent the two superpowers from drifting further and further apart. On the other hand it helped from the beginning to mediate regional disputes and to play a role in peacekeeping missions. With the later expansion of the UN to include the nations of the Third World—a term devised to describe the developing countries, mostly former colonial countries, not directly aligned with either the Western or Soviet camp—the General Assembly became a forum for debate in which the developing nations, critical of the wealthier West, vehemently voiced their social and economic grievances.

The Cold War: Origins and Nature

The Second World War left only the United States and the Soviet Union still standing in any strength. The United States emerged physically unscathed from the war, its economy stronger than ever before. Although it demobilized much of its wartime military force, it alone possessed the atomic bomb. The Soviet Union had been devastated by the war, in which over 20 million of its population had perished, but it was still a formidable military power, with 4 million soldiers under arms and in control of populations and territories in central and eastern Europe well beyond its pre-1939 boundaries. It became common to speak of the two countries as superpowers—continental land giants, possessing enormous resources, overshadowing all other states, including the long-dominant nations of western Europe.

In the kind of two-superpower system that emerged after the Second World War, each power can readily identify its only dangerous enemy. A diplomatic equilibrium is more difficult to sustain in such situations because each views the other power’s every action as possible aggression or provocation; and each, ignorant of the other’s strength, exaggerates the power and danger of its enemy. After 1945 the United States and the U.S.S.R. fell into this unhappy relationship. It was compounded by a deep-seated ideological tension between capitalist democracy and Marxist-Leninist communism that dated back to the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. The widening diplomatic, geopolitical, and ideological clash of interests came to be known as the Cold War, so called because the antagonisms and rivalries, intense though they were, always fell short of open or direct military hostilities between the two powers.

It was not possible for anyone to know what Stalin, who dictated all decisions, or his lieutenants in the Kremlin, really believed or intended at the end of the Second World War. Probably they considered a clash between the U.S.S.R. and the Western capitalist powers as inevitable at some point in the future. Probably they were disturbed by the ambitious goals of American capitalism, which sought markets in eastern Europe and elsewhere, and by the American monopoly of the atomic bomb. They themselves undoubtedly saw an opportunity to consolidate their hold over territories gained during the war (or regained, since the new Soviet state had lost control of some of these territories at the end of the First World War), and to create an outer buffer zone for Soviet national security. Undoubtedly they also saw in the aftermath of the Second World War, as of the First, an opportunity to promote the international Communist cause.

Whether the Soviets were acting to protect their national security, fulfill old Russian territorial ambitions antedating communism, or promote communism on a world scale, President Truman and his advisers and a great majority of the American people became convinced that the Soviets were bent on consolidating their grip on central and eastern Europe and then embarking on a worldwide Communist offensive. The American government therefore developed a global strategy of “containment,” by which die United States and its allies would seek to “contain” this new Soviet offensive. Although the American government would take direct military steps mainly in reaction to Soviet expansion or threats of expansion, many people in the United States came to ascribe almost all of the complex social and political unrest on the globe to initiatives launched by the Kremlin.

In Europe, at the close of hostilities, Soviet armies occupied eastern Europe and Germany as far west as the Elbe River. American, British, and French armies held the remainder of Germany, most of Austria, and all of Italy. During the war, the armed forces liberating an area exercised political authority. In that way, the sweep of the Red Army gave the Soviets political control over much of central and eastern Europe; 100 million people passed under Soviet domination. On the other hand, the United States excluded the Soviets from any active role in its occupation of Italy (and, in Asia, of Japan). For the Soviet Union, occupation meant full control over a nation’s political, economic, and social institutions and the right to shape the occupied country in its own image. The Western powers, on the other hand, had hoped for pluralist and democratic societies, which would have been open to Western trade and influence. During the war the Americans and British had conceded Soviet predominance in eastern Europe, which the Soviets had liberated from the Nazis, but they soon resented the transformation of Poland and other East European countries into Soviet-dominated Communist states.

For Stalin, however, this kind of transformation was the only way to guarantee “friendly regimes” on his borders. Beginning as early as the Potsdam conference in July 1945, Truman denounced the Soviets for violating then-pledge of free elections for the East European states and for failing to cooperate in the joint occupation of Germany. American diplomats began to believe that Soviet control over eastern Europe was similar to the Nazi and Fascist aggression of the 1930s, to which Truman himself frequently compared it. Stalin may have been acting more as a Russian nationalist bent on protecting Russian national security than as a champion of worldwide Communist revolution, but his stubbornness and paranoia about capitalist encirclement, and his lack of concern for world public opinion, made it difficult for the West to deal with him in the Cold War or to distinguish between legitimate Soviet security needs and an expansionist. Communist missionary zeal.

A series of Soviet actions fed the belief that Stalin’s ambitions transcended eastern Europe. In Asia, as pledged at Yalta, the Soviets had declared war on Japan in August 1945 and moved into Manchuria, where they were well positioned to help the Chinese Communists. In Korea, once the Japanese were defeated, the Soviets by agreement occupied the northern part of the country but also took steps to consolidate their occupation zone into a Communist government. Iran was another trouble spot. The Americans, British, and Russians had jointly occupied Iran during the war to forestall a Nazi takeover, but the Soviets refused to evacuate their troops at the stipulated time and pressed for oil concessions (such as the British and Americans already enjoyed).

The Soviets also sought a trusteeship over the former Italian colonies in North Africa, within easy reach of the Suez Canal; and they massed troops on the Turkish border, pressing for joint control over the Black Sea straits and for naval access to the Mediterranean through the Dardanelles—an old tsarist goal. The British, acting again in their earlier role as the “Western” guardians of the Mediterranean and Middle East, bolstered the Turkish defenses despite their own financial weakness. In Greece, in a civil war which raged from 1946 to 1949, Communist guerrillas battled the British-supported royalist, or nationalist, army. Stalin, perhaps recognizing his wartime agreement with Churchill that Greece would remain in the Western sphere of influence, lent little aid to the Communists, but Tito’s new Communist regime in Yugoslavia helped the Communist guerrillas. The Communist pressures on Turkey, Greece, and Iran aroused British and American concerns about Soviet strategic designs on the eastern Mediterranean and on the oil reserves of the Middle East.

One casualty of the postwar tension was a plan for international supervision of nuclear weapons. The United States knew that it was only a matter of time before the Soviets (and other nations) could build the atomic bomb, since the scientific basis for it was known. At the moment the British alone shared the secret. The United States proposed in 1946 that atomic energy be controlled by an international authority and that its use be limited to peaceful purposes. Such an international body would have the right to send inspectors into any country to check violations and enforce sanctions that would not be subject to veto in the Security Council. The Soviets objected and would not give up their veto. The idea of foreigners freely examining their society was repugnant to them. They questioned the good faith of the United States, which would not destroy its atomic bombs or halt further testing and production until the proposed international authority was established (many Americans also opposed international controls on their own nuclear arms). The British, in turn, fearful of an American relapse into isolationism, undertook to become a nuclear power on their own. The plan for international control foundered on mutual suspicion and mistrust. The Soviets proceeded with their own atomic research (and efficient espionage), which yielded results even sooner than expected. In 1949 the Soviets successfully tested an atomic bomb, and the nuclear arms race, universally dreaded, now began.

The political conflicts had meanwhile deepened in 1946 and 1947. The American policy of containment, as formulated by the State Department, postulated that the Russians would expand wherever a power vacuum existed. Advocates for the strategy of containment argued that the West should show both patience and firmness, and in time Soviet society itself might change. In the meantime, however, the West needed to maintain its military strength and use economic and other counterpressures to resist the Soviets. Containment, the cornerstone of American policy, came to be interpreted in more rigorously military terms than some of its early proponents had intended. Meanwhile Churchill, even before the Soviets had fully completed the transformation of eastern Europe into Communist satellites, made an eloquent speech in March 1946 in which he described the “iron curtain” that had descended between eastern and western Europe—“from Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic.” That spring the United States turned down a pending Soviet request for a reconstruction loan, Congress having decided that Lend-Lease should end with the war, and also cut off reparations deliveries to the Soviets from the American occupation zone of Germany.

In 1947 financially strained Great Britain, forced to cut back on its commitments in the Mediterranean, informed Washington that it could no longer aid the anti-Communist forces in Greece or support Turkey in its resistance to Soviet pressures. The United States quickly moved to fill the vacuum. Truman not only agreed to provide the necessary assistance in the Mediterranean but at the same time also formulated in March 1947 a broad national policy to contain communism everywhere—“to assist free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.” The Truman Doctrine committed the United States to unprecedented involvement in global military and economic affairs. The Marshall Plan, designed to hasten European economic recovery and hence check Communist expansion, was also announced in the spring of 1947.

The American national security state began to take shape. A National Security Council was created to advise the president on security matters, and a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was created to coordinate the gathering of intelligence. The CIA soon received authorization to conduct covert operations as well. The authority of the executive branch to conduct foreign policy grew. In 1948 the United States adopted its first peacetime military draft.

The Soviets in their turn denounced the American capitalist and imperialist “warmongers.” With the United States arming Greece and Turkey; American air bases established in the Middle East; American armed forces in occupation of Japan, Okinawa, and South Korea; and the Americans possessing the atomic bomb, the Soviets felt threatened and encircled. Soviet suspicions mounted after 1947, but they also drew on memories that went back to Western intervention in the Russian Revolution and civil war in 1917-1920, the Soviets’ exclusion from the Munich Pact, and the delay in opening up a second front in the Second World War as well as the cessation of Lend-Lease at the end of the war and the rejection of a requested postwar loan.

In 1947 the Soviets decided they needed to reassert closer control over all Communist parties in every part of the world. They therefore reestablished in new form the old Communist International, or Comintern, which had been abandoned in 1943 as a gesture of wartime cooperation and goodwill, renaming it the Communist Information Bureau, or Cominform. The Soviets also replaced coalition governments in central and eastern Europe, in which the Communists had formerly shared power, with regimes dominated by Communist parties. In Czechoslovakia, for example, where President Benes’s democratic coalition had been viewed as a possible bridge between East and West, the Czech Communist party, faced with defeat in a forthcoming election, seized power in February 1948. By this time, the postwar Soviet-American suspicions and conflicts had created a mutual perception of permanent dangers, which each side sought to counter by its own assertive political or military actions. The increasingly bitter Cold War therefore spread into the local disputes and political confrontations that were constantly developing in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere around the globe.

Germany: The Berlin Blockade and the Airlift of 1948-1949

The key to the rebuilding of Europe, and the most critical area of Soviet-Western contention, was Germany, divided by Allied agreement into four zones and occupied by the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, and France. The Allies had agreed to joint Allied policies for a defeated Germany, even though each of the four powers was to occupy its separate zone. Berlin also was divided into four separate Allied sectors, with joint administration for the city as a whole. All had agreed that Germany should pay reparations, both in capital equipment and current production, mainly to the Soviet Union, which had suffered most from German military destruction, and that limits should be placed on German productive capacity.

At the war’s end the Americans, supported by the British, quickly came to favor the economic reconstruction of Germany to accelerate European recovery and to reduce European dependence on American financial aid. The Ruhr, in the western zone, was still Europe’s industrial heartland. The Soviets, on the other hand, were determined to use German resources to repair the devastation in their own country. They removed large amounts of food and stripped entire plants of machinery in their zone. The Western Allies refused to permit the dismantling of factories in their zones and insisted that the Soviets take their share of current production only from their own zone. By May 1946 joint administration of Germany had all but broken down. Early in 1947 the United States and Britain united their two zones; the French, overcoming their initial reluctance to see a revived Germany, soon merged their zone as well. The Western powers encouraged the reconstruction of governments in the individual German states and the convening of a constituent assembly to set up a federal republic. The Soviets, in their zone, took steps to establish a Communist-dominated government. Two Germany s were emerging.

In June 1948 the Western powers, recognizing the need for drastic currency reform to cope with inflation and encourage West German economic revival, suddenly revoked the old worthless currency and at a l-to-10 ratio issued a new German mark, the Deutsche mark. The Soviets, who had not been consulted, objected to this violation of the wartime agreement to treat Germany as a single economic unit. In retaliation they blockaded all road and rail access to Berlin, which lay 100 miles deep within the Soviet zone. The blockade was a sharp challenge and test of will. If the West abandoned Berlin, it could lose authority in all Europe and open the way for Soviet westward expansion, and perhaps expansion elsewhere. Knowing that they could not resort to military measures against the much stronger Soviet ground forces, the Allies responded with a massive airlift. For close to a year, American and Western aircraft flew in thousands of tons of food and other supplies to the occupation forces and to the 3 million inhabitants of West Berlin. The Soviets harassed the planes but avoided direct confrontation and, finally, in May 1949 lifted the blockade.

Each side now proceeded with the formation of a German government. The Federal Republic of Germany, its capital in the small Rhineland city of Bonn, came into existence in September 1949; the German Democratic Republic, its capital in the eastern sector of Berlin, one month later. There were now two Germanys, and the division of Europe had hardened along a rigid new political boundary.

The Atlantic Alliance

In 1948 Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg formed a West European Union for collective self-defense, but it had only limited military resources. In 1949 the United States took the lead in creating a larger military alliance and collective security system. The United States, Canada, and ten European nations met in Washington and agreed to military arrangements for the joint defense of western Europe. The Atlantic Pact was a military alliance of unlimited duration and broad scope: “an armed attack against one or more” was to be considered “an attack against all.” The United States formally committed itself to the security of western Europe and agreed to supply funds and equipment for European rearmament. It was the first such military alliance of its kind in American history.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) emerged with a network of military arrangements and a chain of command headed by General Eisenhower. Because West Germany remained the most vulnerable target for Soviet expansion, large numbers of American troops (eventually over 300,000) were stationed there as the nucleus of the NATO armed forces. But with overwhelming Soviet superiority in ground forces, the NATO defense strategy was based primarily on American air power rather than on ground troops alone. The treaty solemnly affirmed American determination not to abandon the Continent. In later years the West Europeans became restive with American leadership, or, alternatively, feared an American decoupling from Europe, but NATO remained western Europe’s shield against Soviet aggression. The Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization were the three prongs of the American and Western response to a potential Soviet challenge.

Meanwhile the West European countries, with the aid of the Marshall Plan, were making an impressive economic recovery and cooperating with each other (the Marshall Plan is discussed in the next section of this chapter). The Soviets could not be expected to view with equanimity the revival and growing unity of western Europe. American financial and military assistance, NATO, the containment policy, all defensive in Western eyes, and indeed provoked by Soviet expansionism, were hostile acts from the Soviet perspective. The Soviet Union drew its six satellite or client states, variously styled people’s republics or people’s democracies, closer to it. It formalized economic ties by creating in 1949 a Council for Mutual Economic Aid and a few years later coordinated the existing network of military alliances in the Warsaw Pact of 1955. The Soviets added to their military and air power and continued their nuclear research.

By 1949 Stalin’s postwar expansion seemed contained and Truman could claim success for his policies. The Soviets had dropped their demands on Turkey and departed from Iran. Insurrectionary strikes launched by Communist parties in western Europe had failed, as did a Communist bid for power in Italy in the elections of 1948, in which the Vatican and the United States strongly supported the anti-Communist camp. Marshal Tito in 1948 successfully defied the Cominform, and Yugoslavia went its separate Communist way. In Greece the American- and British-backed Greek royalists triumphed in 1949 against the Communist guerrillas. The Soviet blockade of Berlin had failed to drive the West from the city.

The rivalry over Europe thus led to a stalemate by about 1950. The Soviet threat to western Europe diminished. The continent remained divided into a western and eastern Europe, Germany into two Germanys, Berlin into West and East Berlin. After the failure of the Soviet blockade of Berlin, there was no such overt conflict in Europe. Despite renewed threats to Berlin, each side recognized the strength and security concerns of the other. But any thoughts that the world might settle into peace, no matter how uneasy, were shattered in June 1950. The Western-Soviet struggle shifted to Asia.

The Revival of Japan

In Asia events and new conflicts also developed rapidly in the early postwar years. The Chinese Communists triumphed over the Nationalists and Mao Zedong proclaimed the People’s Republic of China in 1949. In Japan the United States used its military occupation from 1945 to 1952 to foster parliamentary institutions and revive the Japanese economy.

Rejecting Soviet demands for a share in the occupation of Japan, the United States, with British and French approval, lodged full authority in General Douglas MacArthur as supreme commander of the occupation forces. Responding in part to the new Cold War tensions, the American occupation encouraged economic revival and political reconstruction, not vindictiveness; and the Japanese, stunned by their disastrous defeat, were willing to cooperate. In the interests of stability the emperor received special status and was shielded from trial or even criticism. A new constitution in 1946 ended divine-right rule, transferred sovereignty from the emperor to the people, established machinery for parliamentary government, gave women the vote, and encouraged local self-government. The constitution “forever” renounced war and the threat or use of force as a means of settling international disputes; the small Japanese armed forces were to be restricted to defensive purposes. Although trials of Japanese war criminals were held, there were no extensive purges. The Japanese paid reparations to Asian nations that had been the victims of Japanese conquest but did not even years later fully acknowledge the brutality that had accompanied these conquests.

Efforts at social and economic reform under the occupation were less sweeping than originally planned. The large family holdings in heavy industry and banking were dissolved, but within a short time new forms of economic concentration replaced them. Labor unions were reinstituted but their powers were curtailed. When the occupation inaugurated a program of land redistribution, with a limit on large landholdings, small farmers lacked the means to purchase the land offered them. Although a moderate Socialist party emerged and militant activists in later years frequently demonstrated their discontent, political control remained in the hands of conservatives drawn from the upper social classes. By the end of the occupation the Liberal Democratic party (a conservative party) dominated the government and long continued to do so.

The conservative-led political consensus emphasized a strong commitment to economic recovery and growth. Like western Europe, Japan, too, recovered rapidly. In 1945 it had been prostrate, a fourth of its housing destroyed, agricultural and industrial output reduced to half its prewar level, its shipping and financial reserves gone. Under the occupation, and with American help, the economy revived and expanded; by 1954 its gross national product reached prewar levels. Labor self-discipline and social patterns of deference and loyalty kept industrial unrest to a minimum. Close cooperation between government and business encouraged savings, investment, research, and economic growth. The very need to rebuild and renovate the economy from the bottom up proved an advantage.

Beginning in the early 1950s the economy grew at an amazing rate of nearly 10 percent each year; manufacturing output, at 14 percent. Despite the repatriation of millions of Japanese from Manchuria, Korea, and other parts of Asia and the addition of large numbers of rural workers to the labor force, Japan still had a labor shortage. The response was an intense level of automation. Japan became a pioneer in advanced high technology, and technological innovations sustained its economic growth. Japanese consumer products soon entered the world economy, creating a flow of exports that came to rival those of the Americans and the Europeans. Because a large military establishment was forbidden, expenditures that might have gone into the military, as in the past, were now plowed into industrial investments. By the 1950s Japan was once again a major economic power, a bastion of social stability, and a major new element in the global economy. For the Soviets the revival of Japan under American auspices, which they saw as a counterweight to Soviet influence and as a bulwark against revolution in Asia, loomed as still another threat.

Containment in Asia: The Korean War

The Western Allies and the Soviet Union had agreed during the Second World War that Korea, once an object of imperialist rivalry between Japan and tsarist Russia, but under Japanese rule since 1910, would become free and independent after Japan’s defeat. In 1945 the United States, for reasons of military expediency, proposed that Soviet troops temporarily occupy the northern part of the country down to the 38th parallel; United States troops would temporarily occupy the southern half. But postwar negotiations for a unified Korea foundered. The U.S.S.R. established a satellite government in its occupation zone under the Communist leader Kim Il Sung and built up North Korean military strength. The United States developed its own client state in the south and lent economic and military assistance. In 1947 a UN commission sought to sponsor nationwide elections, but the Soviet Union would not permit supervision of elections in the north. The elections in the south in May 1948 resulted in the presidency of Syngman Rhee, who, despite superficial forms of democracy, governed autocratically. Anticommunism in Korea and elsewhere did not necessarily equate with democracy. After the elections the United States withdrew its occupation forces but continued to provide military and economic support. The Soviet Union also removed its occupation forces but left behind a well-trained and well-equipped North Korean army. Despite the original intention, two Koreas had come into existence.

By 1950 the situation in East Asia, as we have seen, had altered dramatically. Japan had revived. The United States through its postwar occupation had helped to create a stable Japan, friendly to the West and with a prospering economy. In addition, the Chinese Communists, with only limited and grudging Soviet support, had triumphed over the Nationalists in a long civil war and in 1949 had proclaimed the Chinese People’s Republic. Although relations between the Chinese Communists and the Soviets were neither warm nor cordial, the two countries shared similar concerns about the revival of Japan and the growth of American influence in East Asia. They therefore drew together in a mutual defense pact in February 1950, and the U.S.S.R. campaigned to have the People’s Republic of China replace Nationalist China in the United Nations. When this campaign failed, the Soviets in protest boycotted the Security Council meetings.

Although border skirmishes between North and South Korea had been frequent, the sudden, full-scale North Korean invasion of the south in June 1950 came as a surprise. In the West it was seen as an open act of military aggression, the first such clear-cut military aggression of the Cold War. Because of the boldness of their initiative and their superior forces, the North Koreans expected a quick victory. They gambled that the United States would not intervene and that the outside world would lodge no more than a moral protest, thus allowing the Communists to gain control of the entire Korean peninsula.

The precise inspiration for the invasion remains somewhat unclear. North Korea, concerned over the south’s avowed ambition to unite the country on pro-Western terms, seems to have taken the initiative on its own. It is known, however, that Stalin was aware of the North Korean intentions and even allowed the Soviet military to help plan aspects of the invasion, counting on a quick victory and a limited international response. Yet the timing of the invasion seems to have surprised the Soviets who, as noted, were boycotting the Security Council, unable to exercise their veto when the Council condemned the invasion and authorized military countermeasures. The Chinese, recovering from their civil war, barely established in power, and still facing a challenge from the Nationalists in Taiwan, seemed unlikely to have initiated it. In any case, even if the attack caught their Communist allies somewhat off guard, the sweeping initial successes of the North Koreans offered the Soviets and the Chinese an opportunity to check the growing American influence in Japan and East Asia. The Soviets quietly furnished military aid to North Korea and denounced the United States for intervening in Asian affairs—on the very doorsteps of the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China.

For the American government, and for most Americans, it was difficult to believe that the attack had not been secretly engineered in Moscow or that the North Koreans were capable of independent action. The Americans assumed that the Soviets, probing in Asia for weak spots as they had elsewhere, had found one and now must be halted. Korea, like Berlin, became another test of American and Western will.

Truman, already concerned about the “loss of China” (the formula used at the time by his political critics for the Chinese Communist victory in 1949), saw the North Korean invasion as a test of the “free world’s commitment to liberty.” The attack challenged the entire system of collective security and containment built to stem the tide of Soviet communism. The Soviets, he said, had passed “beyond the use of subversion” to “armed invasion and war.” Without asking for an American declaration of war because it was deemed to be a “police action,” Truman, in conformity with the Security Council resolution, ordered American combat troops to Korea and called for air strikes above the 38th parallel. General MacArthur, the wartime hero of the Pacific who had successfully presided over the occupation of Japan, was named commander of the UN multinational forces, of which the Americans made up the major part.

In the early fighting in the summer of 1950 the American-led United Nations forces were driven south to the very water’s edge, where they faced expulsion from the peninsula. But in September MacArthur made a remarkable amphibious landing on the western side of the peninsula, drove the North Koreans back above the 38th parallel, and then rapidly moved north toward the Yalu River, the boundary between Korea and the People’s Republic of China. Mao, incensed at the arrival of a multinational army on the Chinese border, took action to assert China’s international importance. In late October, a large Chinese “voluntary” army suddenly appeared and within two weeks drove the advancing UN armies back below the 38th parallel. It was an entirely new war, to which China was now committed. The European allies, at first gratified by the American show of determination, grew worried that the war could escalate into a global, possibly nuclear, conflict.

Meanwhile the battle lines seesawed. MacArthur forced the Chinese and North Korean troops to retreat, again crossed the 38th parallel, and demanded unconditional surrender. He proposed to blockade the Chinese coast, bomb Chinese cities, encourage the Chinese Nationalists to attack the Chinese mainland, and even seal off Korea from China by a field of radioactive waste. Truman recognized, however, that Mac Arthur’s threats could lead to full-scale war with China, to Soviet intervention, and to a wider war in which the United States would lack the full support of its European allies. When the general publicly flouted the president’s authority, Truman replaced him with another commander and sought to negotiate a truce.

In July 1951 a cease-fire agreement brought large-scale fighting to a halt, but armistice negotiations dragged on, deadlocked over the repatriation of North Korean prisoners who did not wish to return home. In July 1953 under General Eisenhower’s presidency an armistice was signed, the line of partition drawn roughly where the fighting had begun three years earlier, at the 38th parallel, with provision for a demilitarized buffer zone. The partition hardened into another long-term division. North Korea became a rigid Communist dictatorship, and increasingly so under Kim Il Jong, son of the founder of the North Korean state. South Korea, unable to achieve political democracy under Syngman Rhee or for a long time under his successors, nonetheless developed a dynamic capitalist economy, far outstripping North Korea in economic strength. At the beginning of the next century, many decades later, over 40,000 American troops remained stationed in South Korea and the increasingly isolated North Korean regime was trying to build a small arsenal of nuclear weapons; but negotiations were beginning to reduce some of the tensions between the two Koreas.

The Korean War was costly for all sides. The United States, which furnished half the ground troops and almost all the naval and air power for the 15-nation UN force, suffered over 54,000 deaths in the undeclared war, close to half as many as in the First World War; the American wounded were estimated at over 100,000. But the South Koreans suffered over 1 million casualties in dead, wounded, and missing; and the North Koreans and the Chinese each lost about equal numbers. In all some 3 to 4 million lives may have been lost in a war that the Soviets had fought by proxy.

The war also affected the global economy. The United States alone spent over $15 billion, but the U.S. economy could not by itself supply all of America’s military needs. The war therefore stimulated the economic growth of western Europe and Japan, and it also quickened the pressures for German rearmament. In American eyes, such costs were justified because a flagrant act of aggression had been checked, and the global containment strategy had achieved success in Asia. Most people in western Europe, even those who were concerned about Mac Arthur’s recklessness, also found reassurance in the firm American response to a communist military invasion.

As seen in the Communist world, however, and indeed in many of the nonaligned countries in Asia such as India or Indonesia, the Korean War had prevented the United States, the great capitalist power, from reasserting Western imperialist supremacy in the East. In its efforts to create regional security pacts in Asia, the United States found little enthusiasm among the larger non-Communist Asian powers who disliked communism but also distrusted the West. Although the United States had been the least involved of all the Great Powers in nineteenth-century territorial imperialism in Asia, its new leadership of the Western world made it a symbol of Western oppression, buttressed by the suspicion that its free-world rhetoric only masked a drive to create world markets for American capitalism—an image assiduously cultivated by the Soviets and by the Chinese Communists.

On the other hand, its success in checking the North Korean act of aggression by force of arms reinforced the American belief that military strength and decisiveness could check Communist expansion anywhere in the world; containment would be global. The Korean War inaugurated an era of deep American involvement in Asia and served as prelude to an even longer and more costly conflict, the war in Vietnam in the following decade.

The Korean War also had its political repercussions in Europe. Despite continuing misgivings in France and in other parts of Europe over a revival of German military strength, the Americans pressed for West German rearmament. When a French proposal for a European Defense Community (with a “European army,” in which the Germans were to serve as “European soldiers”) failed to pass the French legislature in 1954, West Germany was authorized to create an army of its own under the overall command of NATO. Concern over a resurgent German militarism was receding. The West German constitution guaranteed civilian control over the military, and a strong antimilitarist movement had emerged in the country itself. In 1955 the Federal Republic of Germany became a full member of NATO.

Meanwhile, the Korean War hastened a formal peace treaty with Japan. In the peace treaty signed in 1951 in San Francisco by 50 nations, but without Soviet participation, no general reparations were exacted, but individual countries were to work out their own reparations agreements. In a separate security pact the United States retained military rights in Japan and occupied nearby islands, where, under agreement, the United States would remain as long as necessary for peace and security. A year later the American occupation of Japan formally ended. The Soviets made no move to return the Kurile Islands, which they had occupied at the end of the Second World War. The United States meanwhile signed security pacts with Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines, reinforcing its global commitments.

The decades that followed the troubled international relations of the early Cold War brought new confrontations and crises—over Berlin, Cuba, Vietnam, the Middle East, and Africa, to name only the most important—and above all, a mounting nuclear arms race between the two superpowers and the stockpiling of the most formidable weaponry ever assembled. The nuclear arms race moved on to an even more deadly level of competition in late 1952, when the United States successfully tested its first thermonuclear or hydrogen bomb, hundreds of times more powerful than the atomic bomb used at Hiroshima. The Soviets at almost the same time, in 1953, also developed a hydrogen bomb. Both sides developed strategic delivery systems as well, thereby ensuring that neither side could gain a decisive military advantage in the evolving Cold War. But before continuing with the Cold War, we must examine in this and the following chapter many other developments of these years—the remarkable economic recovery and political reconstruction of western Europe, the reshaping of the global economy, the world of the Communist countries, and the emergence of new nations from the old Western colonial empires.

109. WESTERN EUROPE: ECONOMIC RECONSTRUCTION

The Second World War had left Europe in a worse state of disorder than the First. It had ruined one of the world’s chief industrial areas and brought its economic system to collapse. Even when the worst local devastation was repaired, suffering and distress persisted. Europe could no longer pay for the imports that it needed. During the war the West Europeans, and especially the British, had used up their overseas investments and lost a good share of the shipping services they had once provided. Overseas countries had built up their own industries and needed those of Europe less, and the United States had taken over markets once in European hands.

At the same time, western Europe was not to be written off. Its population exceeded that of either of the superpowers. Even in ruins, it still possessed one of the world’s leading industrial plants and the skills needed to rehabilitate and run it. The Europeans did not wish to be rescued by either of the superpowers. Most rejected communism as a modern form of enslavement. Yet they feared excessive dependence on the United States. Memories of the stock-market crash of 1929, the economic collapse of Europe after the withdrawal of American capital, and the Great Depression bred skepticism about American capitalism.

The Marshall Plan and European Recovery

For the non-Communist world, the single most important economic reality in the early postwar years was the productivity of the American economic system. The American economy had expanded enormously during the war.

At the war’s end the United States accounted for two-thirds of the world’s industrial production and held two-thirds of the world’s gold. Its gross national product was two and a half times higher than in 1939; its exports were three times greater. Despite predictions about postwar economic collapse, its economy grew at unprecedented rates in the 1950s and 1960s.

When Lend-Lease ended after the war, the United States sent billions of dollars worth of goods to western Europe to relieve distress and made loans to individual states, especially to Britain. But the Europeans themselves quickly set about to rebuild their economies. Within two years, by 1947, the economies of western Europe were approaching prewar levels of production. American aid was still desperately needed, however, to continue the purchase of food, fuel, raw materials, and industrial parts essential to full recovery. By the spring of 1947 that recovery appeared at risk. The poorest harvest in a century was feared. With Cold War tensions mounting, Communist parties in France and Italy moved away from earlier cooperation in postwar reconstruction and launched a wave of strikes. Even if the Soviet Union was not actively promoting revolution in western Europe, understanding perhaps that the West would not tolerate overt revolution there, the Americans were concerned about European stability. Between the two superpowers the Soviets had more to gain by chaos in western Europe and the United States had more to gain by its rebuilding.

American economic aid so far had been improvised and piecemeal. In June 1947 Secretary of State George C. Marshall used the occasion of his Harvard commencement address to invite the Europeans to cooperate in drawing up blueprints for a broad program of reconstruction, for which the United States would provide the financial support. The plan, as formulated, was “directed not against country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos.” To reinforce its nonpolitical character, the United States extended the invitation to all European governments, including the Soviet Union and the East European states. The Soviet Union rejected the proposal and forbade the participation of its East European satellites, denouncing the plan as “a new venture in American imperialism.”

The West European countries responded eagerly. Under the Marshall Plan, or European Recovery Program, as enacted by Congress, American aid was coordinated with each country’s needs and with joint European priorities to maximize the benefits. The Office for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) in Paris, with which the Americans worked closely, identified projects, coordinated the planning, and allocated the funds.

The results of the Marshall Plan exceeded the boldest anticipations of its American sponsors. The West Europeans utilized their technical and managerial skills to improve transportation facilities, modernize their infrastructure, and expand their productive capacity. They reduced trade barriers among themselves and facilitated trade by setting up a payments union. Hard currency, now available for imports, reduced the financial pressures on West European governments and the need for further austerity. The Marshall Plan accelerated the recovery already under way, smoothed the recovery process, and encouraged the economic cooperation of the European countries with each other.

While the United States thus used its economic resources to help revive its competitors, the Marshall Plan also served American interests by restoring a world market, of which the United States would be a principal beneficiary. By creating markets for American exports, it helped fuel the postwar economic boom in the United States. The Americans satisfied their humanitarian impulse, served their economic needs, and reduced the drift of Europeans into the Communist camp. At the same time the Marshall Plan sharpened the division between the Soviet bloc and the West.

Economic Growth in Western Europe

For West Germany the currency reform of 1948, Marshall Plan aid, and the economic opportunities opened up by the Korean War ignited a stunning economic revival and expansion, the Wirtschaftswunder, or “economic miracle.” By 1950 the Federal Republic of Germany was exceeding prewar Germany’s production levels, and by 1958 it was the leading industrial country of western Europe. France, Italy, and other West European countries experienced an “economic miracle” also. For two and a half decades, from 1948 to 1974 (when a global recession set in), the western European economies grew at unprecedented and uninterrupted rates of growth. The West Europeans basked in prosperity and rising living standards. Europeans would later speak of the “silver’ 50s” and the “golden’ 60s”; the French would speak also of the “30 glorious years.” Although Britain’s economy, burdened by older industries and the loss of overseas markets, lagged behind the growth in other countries, it too grew faster than at any time in the interwar years.

The prosperity of western Europe derived from a competitive, capitalist, free-market and private-enterprise economy, but it was accompanied almost everywhere by varying degrees of extensive economic planning, systematic government intervention, and a network of social services to help cope with the instability of competitive capitalism and the business cycle. No one anywhere wished to repeat the hard times and suffering of the Great Depression. Keynes’s theories, first formulated in the 1930s but without many adherents at that time, took hold in the postwar era and dominated government policy in the 1950s and 1960s even when conservative governments were in control. Governments kept their economies under close surveillance and used their fiscal and monetary powers to promote investment, production, and employment and to control inflation. They took “countercyclical” measures; that is, at signs of decline in the business cycle they increased government spending. Full employment was accepted as a goal. Improved statistical techniques and economic forecasting, although far from precision instruments, made economic planning and “fine-tuning” feasible. Such planning, however, took the form of guidance and direction, not coercion, and differed markedly from the rigid, detailed, and doctrinaire centralized planning of the Soviet Union and Soviet bloc.

In Britain, France, and Italy (less so in West Germany, which had lived through state control under the Nazis), the postwar governments also nationalized a number of the key sectors of the economy to bring them under government control. But even in these mixed economies, the private capitalist sector represented the major share of economic activity. In all western Europe economic growth became virtually an obsession as both governments and people came to expect growth rates far exceeding those of the past.

When the sustained economic growth led to a labor shortage, West Germany and other countries invited foreign workers to join their labor force. Turks, Greeks, Yugoslavs, Spaniards, Portuguese, and Italians (mostly from southern Italy) were invited in as “guest workers.” Four and a half million workers arrived in the Federal Republic of Germany alone, over half of them Turks, who did not return home but often formed large unassimilated enclaves. After the postwar collapse of the European colonial empires, immigrants from the former European colonies in Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean also arrived in western Europe in large numbers. Beginning in the 1950s, a steady stream of immigrants flowed into Britain from India, Pakistan, the West Indies, and Africa. France drew large numbers from its former North African colonies, especially Algeria. The Netherlands became home for many Indonesians.

Later political refugees also arrived in Europe from Vietnam and other parts of Asia. The new Europeans were often of different cultures, religion, racial composition, or skin color. Mosques became a common sight in European cities. The influx of guest workers and immigrants by the millions later created new social conflicts and resentments, especially in less affluent times. The growing presence of large immigrant communities led to new social friction, often overtly racial, testing the flexibility and tolerance of a European society that was becoming increasingly multiethnic and multicultural.

A postwar baby boom and an influx of at least 13 million immigrants and refugees increased the population of western Europe by 25 percent between 1945 and 1970. But by the 1960s the birth rate of the West Europeans began to level off and western Europe’s population began to show signs of long-term decline.

In these same postwar years the welfare state grew, going well beyond its pre-1914 origins or its expansion in the interwar years. The postwar governments gave a high priority to social objectives, to what the French Resistance charter had called “a more just social order”: the right to a suitable job, government compensation in the event of unemployment or disability, social security in old age, free or subsidized health care, and the redistribution of wealth and income through progressive taxation. The protection of the welfare state was intended to be universal, not confined, as in earlier times, to the poor and disadvantaged. Its social objectives could be achieved in the 1950s and 1960s because of a salutary interplay of government, management, and labor, which all shared in the consensus about investment and growth. Only later, from the late 1970s on, did the argument gather strength that all these entitlements had become excessive and an impediment to economic growth and competitiveness.

110. WESTERN EUROPE: POLITICAL RECONSTRUCTION

Western Europe also confronted overwhelming challenges of political reconstruction at the end of the war. Britain was economically exhausted and in the process of liquidating its empire. France, recovering from the collapse of 1940, the occupation, and the wartime Vichy regime, became engaged in costly colonial wars in Indochina and Algeria. Italy had to renew its political life after two decades of fascism. Germany, after the Nazi defeat, was divided and under military occupation. Nevertheless political reconstruction went forward. Britain resumed its role as the world’s oldest parliamentary democracy; France and Italy adopted new constitutions; out of the western zone of occupied Germany the Federal Republic of Germany emerged in 1949.

The smaller states of western Europe also resumed their parliamentary democracies. Only Spain and Portugal remained under prewar dictatorships until those regimes also came to an end in the mid 1970s. The right to participate in political life continued to expand throughout western Europe. Women finally received the vote in France and Italy as the war drew to a close and in Switzerland in 1971. And in another suffrage reform that went almost unnoticed, the legal voting age in most countries was quietly reduced to 18 in the 1970s.

The earliest postwar elections showed the political strength of a new desire for social reforms. Wartime Resistance movements had called for a federal union of Europe to prevent future wars and had emphasized the need for economic and social rights as well as political freedom. Postwar governments were therefore asked to provide protection against the insecurities of old age, disability, ill health, and unemployment. Such ideals shaped the political debates and social reforms in the first years after 1945, but politics soon reverted to older patterns of bargain and compromise.

The welfare state idea persisted, as did the impulse for an integrated Europe, but politics became more pragmatic and less ideological. Socialists, following the Scandinavian model, became Social Democratic reformists, accepting capitalism but insisting that they could manage capitalist economies more effectively than liberals, centrists, or conservatives. In France and Italy the presence of large Communist parties, with strong attachments to the Soviet Union in the early postwar years, complicated matters. In the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, and France, the Christian Democrats, drawing inspiration from Roman Catholic religious and ethical precepts, played a key role in shaping and governing the new regimes. They accepted the welfare state but backed away from the egalitarianism of the socialists and, over time, increasingly came to represent conservative and business interests.

Great Britain: Labour and Conservative

In Great Britain, the first parliamentary elections in ten years, in July 1945, unseated Winston Churchill and the Conservative-led wartime coalition and voted in a Labour government. For the first time in its history Labour had a majority of its own. Governing from 1945 to 1951, with Clement Attlee as prime minister, it set Britain on a new course of parliamentary socialism and the modern welfare state.

On the premise that the country’s basic industries could not be left to the unplanned anarchy of capitalism and unregulated competition, the Labour government nationalized the Bank of England, the coal mines, electricity and gas, iron and steel, and other parts of the economy. Because four-fifths of industry remained in private hands, it was a mixed economy that emerged. At the same time Labour greatly expanded and revamped the social insurance program inherited from the Liberal reforms of 1906-1914. During the war, in 1942, the British economist William Henry Beveridge had prepared a government report that proposed to guarantee “full employment in a free society” and social security for all “from the cradle to the grave.” Drawing on the Beveridge Report, Labour now extended insurance coverage for unemployment, old age, and other contingencies; inaugurated a comprehensive national health service; and increased income and inheritance taxes.

In the elections of 1951 Labour lost its majority in Parliament. The Conservatives returned to office and governed for the next 13 years under a succession of prime ministers. After 1964 the two parties alternated in office. The shifting electoral fortunes stemmed from disagreement within the country over the welfare state, dissatisfaction with the performance of the economy, and frustration at Britain’s diminished global status.

During their years in office, the Conservatives restored some nationalized industries to private control but did little else to dismantle the welfare state. Both parties recognized, however, that the social reforms of the welfare state could be absorbed only if the economy prospered. But there were nagging economic problems. The liquidation of investments to pay for the Second World War, the loss of export markets, and a decline in income from shipping and other services adversely affected Britain’s balance of payments and undermined the pound. With American financial aid, an intensified export drive, an austerity program that reduced imports, and a curtailment of military and imperial commitments, the economy improved and the country began to experience a modest prosperity. But the British failed at the time to rebuild their obsolescent capital equipment and infrastructure as effectively as their West European neighbors across the Channel.

Such problems impeded the growth of Britain’s economy and made British workers vulnerable to competition from more efficient foreign industries. When inflation set in during the late 1960s and intensified in the 1970s, the trade unions demanded wage increases to match rising prices. Strikes and prolonged work stoppages troubled the economy and divided British society. Until the late 1970s, when a new era opened, the question was whether Labour or the Conservatives could better manage British decline, not how they could overcome it.

Meanwhile troubles in Northern Ireland persisted. After the partition in 1922, as noted earlier, the six predominately Protestant counties of Northern Ireland, had remained part of the United Kingdom. The Catholic minority, about one-third of the population, protested militantly that they were victims of political and economic discrimination and pressed for annexation to the Republic of Ireland. Open violence broke out in 1969, inflamed by the Irish Republican Army on the one hand and Protestant extremists on the other. In the sectarian violence that followed, over 3,000 persons lost their lives.

The French Republic: Fourth and Fifth

After the liberation of France, General Charles de Gaulle, the very incarnation of the Resistance, became provisional president and elections were held for a Constituent Assembly. Because no one wanted to reestablish the discredited Third Republic, the French undertook the process of creating a new republican government. The parties of the Right were discredited by their role in the Vichy regime, but the Left emerged from the war with new strength and prestige. The Communists, the Socialists, and the Popular Republican Movement (Mouvement Républicain Populaire, or MRP), a Catholic progressive party akin to Christian Democrats elsewhere on the Continent, formed the provisional government. The Left pressed for a systematic purge of collaborators, despite the difficulties in determining levels of guilt. The purge had begun as soon as the army reached French soil, taking the form of angry drumhead trials and executions. Gradually, the process was brought under more orderly judicial procedures. Even so, the trials of Marshal Pétain and Pierre Laval were impassioned showpieces. The debate over collaboration and trials of collaborators continued to divide the country in later decades, in part because some of the most egregious acts of violence against the French Jews and others had originated with the French Vichy government and not the Nazi occupiers.

The Fourth Republic’s machinery of government differed in only a few details from the Third. Once again the presidency was only ceremonial and the premier and cabinet were responsible to an all-powerful National Assembly. De Gaulle made no secret of his dislike for the new constitution, the return of party rivalries, and the dominant role of the legislature, all of which interfered with his vision of a strong France ready to resume a leadership role in world affairs. He resigned in protest in December 1946. The Communists, Socialists, and MRP continued their tripartite coalition under Socialist leadership until the Communists, in the heightened tensions of the Cold War, fomented a series of strikes and were expelled from the cabinet in May 1947.

Parliamentary division and ministerial instability grew more acute. Periodically de Gaulle returned to the political scene, heading a movement called the “Rally of the French People,” which he described as “above parties.” Except for the brief reform ministry of Pierre Mendès-France in 1954-1955, governmental ineffectiveness in the midst of domestic and foreign crises filled the public with cynicism and hostility.

Yet despite its record of political instability—25 cabinets from 1946 to 1958—the Fourth Republic enacted significant legislation. The provisional government had nationalized several key industries, and as in Britain a mixed economy gradually emerged. The existing social security legislation was expanded. An economic plan, drawn up by Jean Monnet, a farsighted economist and public official who later played a large role in the creation of the European Economic Community, enlarged and modernized the country’s economic base and paved the way for industrial expansion. A flexible form of economic planning, inspired by Monnet, in which government, management, and labor played mutually reinforcing roles, became an accepted part of French economic life. By 1952 production levels were 1 1/2 times those of 1938, and industrial output was growing at an annual rate of over 5 percent. From 1946 to 1966 production tripled. (In the half-century from 1889 to 1940, it had no more than doubled.) The country also displayed a demographic vitality, at least for a time, that confounded pessimists who had long worried about France’s low birth rate.

What finally brought down the Fourth Republic was the strain of trying to preserve the old French colonial empire. France alone, of all the major powers, was almost continuously at war for close to 15 years, fighting colonial wars. It could almost envy the lot of Germany, Italy, and Japan who lost the Second World War but emerged from their defeats with no restless colonies to subdue. The new French constitution of 1946 gave the colonies representation in Paris but such reforms did not satisfy nationalists pressing for independence. From 1946 to 1954 the French forces unsuccessfully fought against independence movements in Indochina until they finally had to withdraw. Then, within a matter of months, the Arab movement for independence in Algeria rose up in another anticolonial war, which further drained France’s material resources, political morale, and national confidence. The European settlers in Algeria and army leaders adamantly opposed French withdrawal and staged an insurrectionary coup in Algiers in May 1958. When civil war threatened, the country turned to the one man it believed could save the situation—Charles de Gaulle, then living quietly in self-imposed retirement. The army leaders, the settlers in Algeria, and the parties of the Right were convinced, given de Gaulle’s solicitude for the army and French national pride, that he would maintain French control of Algeria. De Gaulle accepted the summons. In June 1958 the National Assembly invested him as premier, giving him emergency powers for six months, including the authority to prepare a new constitution.

The Fifth French Republic thus emerged from the crisis in Algeria and from the political program of Charles de Gaulle. In the autumn of 1958 the new constitution was overwhelmingly accepted in a popular referendum, and de Gaulle was shortly thereafter elected president. The presidency, as de Gaulle had long urged, became the fulcrum of power. The president was the final authority in foreign affairs and national defense. The president named the prime minister (as the premier was now called) and had the right to dissolve the National Assembly, call for new elections, submit important questions to popular referendums, and assume emergency powers, all of which de Gaulle did during his years in office. Political instability disappeared; in the first 11 years of the Fifth Republic there were only three cabinets.

De Gaulle settled the Algerian crisis in his own way. Sensitive to the revolution sweeping the colonial world, he came to recognize that France must accept a policy of independence for Algeria, which the country approved in a referendum in July 1962. Even earlier he granted independence to all of the French colonies in sub-Saharan Africa. With peace, governmental stability, and economic prosperity, the French reconciled themselves to the loss of empire and looked for new ways to play a leading role on the world scene under de Gaulle. France became the world’s fifth industrial power in the 1960s, behind only the United States, the U.S.S.R., West Germany, and Japan. In 1960 France became the fourth nation, along with the United States, the U.S.S.R., and Britain, to develop a nuclear bomb. De Gaulle even created an independent nuclear strike force, but France also became western Europe’s largest producer of nuclear energy for peacetime energy needs.

After the settlement of the Algerian crisis, de Gaulle built a kind of plebiscitary democracy by direct appeals to the electorate. Although civil liberties were preserved and free elections were maintained, the old democratic ferment disappeared. Skilled technicians ran the affairs of state, and de Gaulle, an uncrowned republican monarch, presided as arbiter over the nation’s destinies.

The nation grew restless. There was increasing skepticism about de Gaulle’s technocratic system of government and his extravagant posturing in world affairs. Suddenly, in May 1968, grievances in the overcrowded universities sparked a revolt that led to demonstrations by hundreds of thousands of students and then brought 10 million workers out on strike, paralyzing the economy and threatening the regime itself. De Gaulle survived the revolt but only after assuring himself of army support. Stressing the threat of communism and domestic chaos, he won an overwhelming majority for his party in new elections. Although there was wide support for institutional reforms in French society, the country as a whole rejected the outburst of radical political agitation, which was similar to revolts of students and young people all over the globe in 1968. Educational reforms and other changes were introduced, but the strikes and social disruptions of 1968 hurt the French economy. In 1969 de Gaulle chose to turn a referendum on various constitutional and regional reforms into a vote of confidence in himself. When his proposed reforms lost by a small margin, he resigned and retired to his country estate, where he died a year later, an august, heroic, austere, and always controversial figure whose exploits in war and peace assured him a lasting place in France’s history.

The Federal Republic of Germany

To communicate to the German people and to the entire world the enormity of the Nazi crimes, the four wartime Allies had convened an international trial in 1945-1946 at Nuremberg. Hitler, Himmler, and Goebbels were already dead, but 22 other Nazi leaders and the major Nazi organizations were indicted for crimes against peace, that is, plotting and waging a war of aggression; war crimes, which were defined as violations of the accepted laws and conventions of warfare; and crimes against humanity, that is, acts of mass murder and genocide. The evidence of evil deeds, massive and incontrovertible, was set down for posterity in many volumes of recorded testimony. Despite the high moral purpose of the trials and an honest effort to establish fair judicial procedures for the accused, some critics questioned their appropriateness, especially the decision to try the leaders of a defeated sovereign nation for planning and waging war and to indict an agency like the General Staff. Some also questioned the propriety of having the Soviet Union sit in judgment of the Nazis. These critics argued that the Soviets were themselves guilty of crimes because they had contributed to the outbreak of the war, shared in the partition of Poland, and incorporated the Baltic states into the Soviet Union. Others dismissed the trials as victors’ justice. Yet the Nuremberg trials served in a singular way to reinforce international standards of civilized behavior. The court condemned 12 of the defendants to execution. Seven received prison terms of varying length, including life sentences; three were acquitted.

The four occupation authorities also carried out a “denazification” program, which produced mixed results. Because so many professional Germans had been members of Nazi organizations, it became difficult to exclude them from public life if the normal processes of government were to resume. Some individuals guilty of the more heinous Nazi crimes fled the country and were still being apprehended and tried many decades after the war’s end by the Germans themselves or in French or Israeli courts. But the people who survived the Nazi camps and the families of Nazi victims only began to receive some financial restitution at the end of the twentieth century.

Divided Germany (and Berlin) became a central arena of the Cold War. The German Democratic Republic became one of the most loyal client states of the Soviet Union. The Federal Republic of Germany became a prosperous parliamentary democracy, a full partner of the West. It faced up to and made efforts to atone for the horrors of the Nazi regime.

The West German government encouraged private industry and a capitalist, competitive economy; but it also shaped overall economic policies and provided broad social services, so that West Germany emerged with what became known as a “social market economy.” The guaranteed benefits came to exceed those of other major industrial Western countries. The Federal Republic also pioneered in bringing labor and capital together. The labor unions accepted a role as social partners in the expanding economy, moderating wage demands to avoid inflation. A “codetermination” law gave workers seats on the boards of directors of larger firms.

After independent state governments had been set up in each state (or Land) in West Germany with the encouragement of the occupying powers, a constitutional convention representing the ten German states met in 1948-1949 in Bonn. The convention produced a Basic Law (or Grundgesetz) and officially established the Federal Republic of Germany. The Basic Law, by design not called a constitution, was to be temporary, valid only until at some future date the two parts of Germany could be reunited. An extensive bill of rights was one of its most prominent features. Power was decentralized under a federal system.

The founders deliberately set out to avoid the weaknesses of the Weimar Republic, The president, elected indirectly and not by popular vote, was a ceremonial figure with limited political power; a president of stature could, however, as the years revealed, exercise substantial moral authority. The head of government, or real executive, was the chancellor, responsible, along with the cabinet, to the majority in the popularly elected lower house, the Bundestag. To avoid instability, a chancellor could be overthrown only when a new majority was ready with an immediate replacement. Proportional representation guaranteed that each party would be apportioned seats equivalent to its share of the popular vote, but to prevent splinter parties and political fragmentation, a party received seats in the legislature only if it won at least five percent of the national vote. The Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democrats emerged as the two chief parties and shared between them a large proportion of the popular vote.

The Christian Democratic Union governed uninterruptedly for 20 years, from 1949 to 1969. In reaction to the Nazi barbarism, it sought to infuse politics with a moral idealism and ethical purpose. Not a confessional party, it appealed to Protestants and Catholics alike, who were almost equally represented in West Germany, and it received strong support from the business community and large segments of the middle classes. The dominating figure in the party and government in the early years was the Christian Democratic leader, Konrad Adenauer, who had begun his career in the pre-1914 imperial era. A patriarchal, strong-willed personality, his ambition was to regain for Germany a position of dignity and international respect. He became chancellor in 1949 at the age of 73 (with only a slim majority) and governed for 14 years. Opponents criticized der Alte (“the old man”) for creating a “chancellor’s democracy”; but he provided the resolute leadership, stability, and continuity that made possible the remarkable economic expansion of the 1950s and the regaining of full West German sovereignty.

Adenauer successfully integrated the Federal Republic of Germany into the emerging political, economic, and military structures of western Europe, strengthening ties with France, cooperating in the movement for European economic integration, and winning the support and confidence of the United States and the other Western powers. Indeed, within a decade after the disastrous military defeat that had left a shattered and occupied country, West Germany was a major economic power, a coveted ally of the West and an equal member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The major opposition party, the Social Democrats, heirs to the Social Democratic party founded in the 1870s, criticized Adenauer for his overly close identification with the United States and for ignoring the issue of national reunification. But the Social Democrats abandoned their Marxist ideology at a party congress in 1959 and broadened their appeal to the middle classes and younger voters.

In 1965 the Social Democrats, who had softened their neutralist stand in foreign affairs, joined the Christian Democrats and the Free Democrats (a small liberal centrist party) in a “grand coalition.” Willy Brandt, the former Social Democratic mayor of West Berlin, became foreign minister and launched his “Eastern policy,” or Ostpolitik, a policy that encouraged building bridges to the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, including East Germany. In 1969, with the support of the Free Democrats, he became chancellor of a new coalition that ended the 20-year tenure of the Christian Democrats. Brandt negotiated treaties with the Soviet Union and Poland in 1971, formally accepting the German eastern frontier at the Oder and West Neisse River line. His government officially recognized the German Democratic Republic and promoted close economic ties with it and other countries of eastern Europe. When a spy scandal in his own entourage cut short his chancellorship in 1974, his Social Democratic colleague Helmut Schmidt took over and continued his policies. Not until 1982 would the Christian Democrats return to office with Helmut Kohl as chancellor. Meanwhile, in the early 1980s, reunification with East Germany still seemed unlikely, only a remote possibility.

The Italian Republic

During the struggle to oust the German armies from the Italian peninsula after the fall of Mussolini in 1943, the Italian political parties, repressed for over two decades under Fascism, sprang to life. All supported the provisional governments in postwar reconstruction and committed themselves to democratic renewal. In 1946 the country voted by a narrow margin to abolish the Savoy monarchy, never distinguished, and now tarnished by its cooperation with the Fascist regime. A constitution for the new Italian Republic established a ceremonial presidency, cabinet government, and legislative supremacy. Proportional representation guaranteed equitable representation for all political parties, large and small.

The Christian Democrats quickly became the dominant party. It appealed to all classes and sectors of Italian society, successfully blending support for democratic political principles, a moderately regulated free-enterprise economy, and the labor tenets of social Catholicism. Although the party remained independent of the Roman Catholic church, it remained close to the hierarchy. In Alcide De Gasperi, who had survived the Fascist years as a librarian in the Vatican, it found an effective leader.

For seven formative years from 1946 to 1953 he presided over a series of coalition governments, which made possible postwar economic reconstruction and expansion. In the Cold War he kept Italy firmly in the Western camp. As in France, the Communist party’s role in the resistance to Fascism helped to establish its position as a leading party in postwar politics. Communists at first held seats in the cabinet and cooperated in economic reconstruction, but when they fomented politically inspired strikes in 1947, De Gasperi dismissed them from his ministry. In 1948, in the early years of the Cold War, the United States intervened openly for the first time in its history to influence a European election, throwing its weight behind the Christian Democrats to thwart the Communists. The Christian Democrats for the first and only time won an absolute majority in the legislature. The Communists, despite their continuing parliamentary strength and support by a third to a fourth of the electorate, remained excluded from the cabinet.

After De Gasperi’s disappearance from the political scene in 1953, the Christian Democrats governed under a succession of short-lived coalition cabinets formed with small centrist parties. Over the years the Christian Democrats became faction-ridden and less interested in reform than in patronage. Abandoning their initial idealism, they catered to propertied and narrow interests, and many in the party profited from business connections. In the early 1960s the Socialists became part of the governing coalition, but this “opening to the Left” did not alter political rigidities, and the country grew impatient with the uninterrupted tenure of the Christian Democrats.

The Communists gained further strength in the 1960s. They weakened their ties with Moscow, renounced tenets of Marxist-Leninist orthodoxy such as the dictatorship of the proletariat, and tempered their assault on religion. Architects, with the French party, of what came to be known as “Eurocommunism,” they declared that each nation, without deferring to Moscow, must find its own way to a new society through parliamentary democracy and national consensus. The strongest Communist party in the Western world, the Italian party counted 1.8 million members at its peak in the mid-1970s and won the support of 35 percent of the electorate. Communist mayors and municipal councils governed in many major cities, including Rome. But the Christian Democrats continued to reject the Communist bid for seats in the national government.

The unstable political scene did not interfere with unprecedented economic growth and prosperity. The industrial triangle of Genoa, Milan, and Turin in northern Italy provided the nucleus for recovery and expansion. A prosperous economy emerged. By 1949 industrial production reached 1939 levels, and by the early 1950s Italy’s rate of industrial growth rivaled that of West Germany and France. Italy was transformed from the primarily agricultural country it had been before the Second World War into one of the world’s leading industrial nations. An economic revolution had dramatically elevated living standards for most Italians. Only the underdeveloped south remained a troubled economic region, even in times of advancing prosperity. In general, however, Italy joined the other nations of Western Europe in a remarkably rapid political and economic recovery from the catastrophic events of the Second World War.

111. RESHAPING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Even before the close of hostilities the United States, with British support, developed a bold initiative to reshape the postwar world economy. Determined to avoid the economic nationalism, trade restrictions, and currency instability of the interwar years, the planners sought to restore the free flow of trade and the stable currencies of the pre-1914 era. In 1944 the United States convened an international conference of 44 nations at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire. The participants pledged to reduce trade barriers and work for stable currencies in the postwar world.

An effort to establish a formal world trade organization to oversee international commerce foundered, but an alternative strategy proved successful. The United States had earlier negotiated bilateral trade agreements with a number of countries to reduce tariffs on a reciprocal basis, with each agreement carrying a “most-favored nation” clause whereby concessions to one country were extended to all. These piecemeal arrangements led in 1948 to a broader arrangement, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), embodying the same negotiating principle. Subscribed to initially by 23 nations, GATT became the foundation of postwar global commerce.

The General Agreement laid down rules to prevent discrimination in international trade, set up procedures for handling complaints, and provided a framework for continuing negotiation through lengthy bargaining sessions, or “rounds,” designed to lower tariffs and remove nontariff barriers. By the 1990s over 100 countries were participating. GATT was only a partial substitute for a formal international trade organization, but it contributed to the vast expansion of world trade beginning in the 1950s. Not until 1997 was a formal World Trade Organization (WTO) established, with enlarged powers to mediate agreements and settle trade disputes. The WTO in its turn faced new problems and recurring controversies as it tried to resolve the conflicting claims of different nations in the global economy.

The “world economy” in the early postwar years meant the world’s non-Communist or free-market economies. The strategic centers were North America and western Europe, with the addition of Japan, which doubled its share of world trade between 1951 and 1960. Integrated into the world economy were Latin America, Asia, the Middle East, Australasia, and Africa, so that it was truly an economy of global dimensions. The Soviet Union played no part in any of the postwar trade negotiations and restricted its commerce principally to its East European bloc of satellites. In the late 1960s the Soviets and the East European countries opened up trade and economic relations with the West, but not until the late 1980s did they seek integration into the global economy.

Currency Stability: Toward the "Gold-Dollar" Standard

If the first objective of the wartime Bretton Woods conference was to liberalize trade, the second was to stabilize the world’s currencies. The chaos of the interwar years when nation after nation abandoned the gold standard and competed in currency devaluations to gain trade advantages haunted everyone. The Bretton Woods conference sought to restore the equivalent of the pre-1914 gold standard, which had provided for fixed exchange rates and the convertibility of all currencies into gold or into the equivalent at the time, British pounds sterling.

Currency stabilization, however, turned out to be more difficult than anticipated. The stable conversion of different currencies into gold or dollars at fixed exchange rates did not become possible until the end of 1958. For about a dozen years, until 1971, each major currency had a par value in gold and in dollars. For that same short time the American dollar, like the British pound before 1914, was accepted as the equivalent of gold itself. But the postwar economic scene changed rapidly; the era of the “gold-dollar standard” proved short-lived, and a system of “floating currencies” and fluctuating exchange rates took its place.

Meanwhile two important agencies established after the war helped in international financial settlements. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) provided loans to governments to manage temporary balance of payments difficulties and to help reduce the need for currency devaluations. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (or World Bank) made long-term loans to the governments of poorer countries for economic development. Both agencies played a larger role in later years than in the immediate postwar era, and both became controversial when critics complained that their policies did not really benefit the world’s poorer nations or people. Both were located in Washington, their major funding provided by the United States. The economic center of gravity for the West, like the political and the military, lay after 1945 on the American side of the Atlantic.

European Integration: From the Common Market to the European Community

As western Europe expanded economically, it also drew closer together in a more integrated economic system. There had been numerous proposals in the interwar years for a European federation. The war, the wartime Resistance movements, the Marshall Plan, European cooperative recovery efforts, and the threat from the Soviet Union in the Cold War all reinforced the idea that western Europe’s future lay in unity. A number of European leaders pressed for the creation of a “United States of Europe.” In 1949 delegates representing the parliaments of ten countries met in Strasbourg to establish a Council of Europe with the hope that it might become a legislative body for a federated Europe. Although the Council of Europe grew in membership over the years and continued to support the idea of federation, it never became an important political force. It confined itself to humanitarian, cultural, and social issues. In 1958 it set up a European Court of Human Rights to protect the rights of individuals in its member nations against arbitrary government actions. It banned corporal punishment in the schools and outlawed the death penalty for convicted criminals.

European integration itself took a different path, beginning in the economic area. In 1948 Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg created a customs union, called Benelux, which provided the benefits of a sizable free trade area for the three small countries. At the same time the visionary but pragmatic French administrator Jean Monnet, who had helped reorganize the postwar French economy, recognized that the first steps toward greater European unity had to develop along modest economic lines and begin with specific objectives.

In 1952, under a plan designed by Monnet, six West European countries—France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, and the three Benelux nations—placed their coal and steel industries under a form of supranational authority. They established the European Coal and Steel Community, its headquarters in Luxembourg. The six nations not only agreed to eliminate import duties and quotas on coal and steel but also placed production under a common High Authority with decision-making powers. A council of ministers represented the six governments, but the High Authority carried out major administrative functions.

Monnet was the first president of the European Coal and Steel Community, which paved the way for economic integration that would extend far beyond a single sector of the West European economy. In a momentous second step, the same six nations on March 25,1957, signed the Treaty of Rome, creating a large free-trade area or customs union, the European Economic Community, or Common Market, its headquarters in Brussels, with the goal of moving toward full economic and even political integration. The six nations pledged to eliminate tariff barriers, develop a common tariff with respect to the outside world, harmonize social and economic policies, and work toward the free movement of capital and labor. Under a separate treaty the member countries also agreed to coordinate their nonmilitary atomic research and technology in a European Atomic Community.

The six-nation Common Market, encompassing 175 million people in 1958, quickly became one of the thriving economic aggregates of the expanding world economy. By 1968, even earlier than anticipated, the last internal tariff was dropped and trade among the six nations grew at a rate double that of trade with outside countries. Its influence spread to the former European colonies, with which it worked out preferential trade arrangements. Through the Common Market, western Europe set about to recapture a key role in the new configuration of global affairs, which had been dominated since 1945 by the two superpowers. The Common Market also helped further absorb a revived democratic West Germany into western Europe and to nurture reconciliation between France and Germany, ending the internecine rivalries that had devastated the European continent in the first half of the twentieth century.

In 1967 the three “Communities” consolidated themselves into what was now designated the European Community. Their high commissions became the European Commission and their assemblies became the European Parliament, meeting in Strasbourg. The members of the European Parliament took seats by party affiliation and not by nation. In 1979, for the first time, they were not chosen by their respective governments but were elected by a Europeanwide electorate. The Parliament enjoyed only limited legislative authority, but it supervised the budget and the European Commission and kept alive the idea of unity. Final decision making still rested with the council of ministers representing each of the member nations, whose decisions on important matters had to be unanimous.

Great Britain initially refrained from joining the Common Market. Its economic ties to the Commonwealth, its dependence on low-priced food imports, and its unwillingness to accept any supranational authority kept both Labour and Conservative governments from joining. But Britain’s economy continued to lag behind the economic growth of the major West European nations, prompting the British government eventually to seek Common Market membership in 1963. Britain’s request was vetoed by President de Gaulle, however, because he regarded Britain and its admittedly “special relationship” with the United States as a threat to French leadership on the Continent. Not until after de Gaulle retired from the political scene in 1969 did Britain gain admission.

If the years 1958-1968 showed remarkable gains in economic integration, the advance toward political unity was slower. Although de Gaulle understood the contribution of the Common Market to the prosperity of western Europe and envisioned a strong western Europe as a counterpoise to the two “hegemonic superpowers,” he opposed political or supranational authority for the Community. Europe had to be a Europe of sovereign states, a Europe des patries. The more dedicated Europeanists were disappointed. Yet the supranational economic and political machinery of the Community, the day-to-day cooperation of the European civil servants or bureaucrats (inevitably called “Eurocrats”) in Brussels and Strasbourg, and the close consultation on common interests were favorable signs for unity, even apart from the military and defense ties that brought the western Europeans together in NATO. French-German friendship, cemented by de Gaulle and Adenauer and reinforced by their successors, remained the linchpin of cooperation within the Community.

The Europeans showed no haste to surrender their national sovereignty and independence, but the European Community created a strong sense of common destiny, a shared faith in democratic institutions and market economies and a concern for human rights and social needs. It not only contributed immeasurably to the economic and political strength of western Europe but also helped restore it to a larger role in world affairs; and by the beginning of the twenty-first century the European Community was projecting its own transnational military force.

Western Europe accounted in the 1960s for one-fourth of all imports and one-fifth of all exports in the world economy; for a time its exports equaled those of the United States and Japan combined. One-third of the largest multinational corporations, that is, corporations which set up subsidiaries outside their own country for manufacturing or sales, were European. London, Frankfurt, and Paris were again important financial centers. In 1971 West European steel production surpassed that of the United States. European (and Japanese) automobiles cut sharply into American domestic and foreign markets. Self-sufficient in food, western Europe became the world’s largest exporter of dairy products. The Federal Republic of Germany, in the 1960s, enjoyed a gross national product exceeded only by the economies of the United States and the U.S.S.R., even though it had only one-fourth the population of each; it accounted for one-third of the Common Market’s gross national product. Western Europe and Japan were whittling away at the American economic lead in production and trade and bringing to a close the era of the dollar’s supremacy.

End of the Gold-Dollar Standard, 1971

The new trading patterns created monetary problems. Because America’s exports no longer exceeded its imports, American trade shifted to an unfavorable balance of payments. The United States spent more abroad than it earned abroad. The postwar dollar shortage in other countries gave way to a “dollar glut.” Western Europe accumulated large dollar reserves (or “Eurodollars”), some $50 billion by 1971; oil-rich Arab states held “petrodollars.” The number of dollars held abroad exceeded American gold reserves.

The shift in the American economic position undermined confidence in a dollar which many now viewed as overvalued. De Gaulle, resentful of American political and economic power, demanded an end to the gold-dollar standard and a return to gold itself. In 1965 France redeemed hundreds of millions of its dollar holdings for gold. Other central banks in Europe and Japan did not follow suit, but private investors speculated against the dollar. American gold and foreign currency reserves dropped precipitously.

In 1971 President Nixon unilaterally suspended gold convertibility and thus devalued the dollar, with a second devaluation in 1973. The global monetary system projected at Bretton Woods ended. Despite many proposals, there was no formal reform. Instead, on a day-to-day basis and with considerable success, the world’s major currencies were allowed to “float,” that is, to fluctuate daily against each other and against the dollar in world markets. Gold itself fluctuated freely and official gold prices were abolished. Although the American dollar remained the world’s principal reserve currency, the West German mark and the Japanese yen took their place beside the dollar as key currencies.

The breakdown of the postwar monetary arrangements did not seriously affect the world economy. Currencies did not collapse because they were no longer exchangeable for gold. For currency stability the world learned to rely mainly on international consultation and rapid exchange of information, but governments found their currencies and economic policies vulnerable to a global financial system that crossed all national boundaries.

112. THE COMMUNIST WORLD: THE U.S.S.R. AND EASTERN EUROPE

Stalinism in the Postwar Years

In March 1953 Russia’s twentieth-century Peter the Great died. Like his eighteenth-century tsarist predecessor, Stalin had a massive impact during his close to 30 years in power. He was responsible for industrialization in the 1930s, the rallying of the country in the Great Patriotic War, the expansion of the nation’s borders, the consolidation of Communist regimes in eastern Europe, and the emergence of the Soviet Union as a nuclear power. But the human costs of the Stalinist transformation of the country were staggering. Millions had fallen victim in the 1930s to his forced collectivization of the countryside and the ensuing famine, and additional millions had died as a result of his purges. Western and Soviet scholars alike have estimated the total figure of Stalin’s victims at least as high as 20 million, quite apart from the millions of lives lost in the Second World War. Because the civil war and war communism earlier under Lenin had also taken millions of lives, the Communist regime from its emergence in 1917 to its demise in 1991 must be counted among the costliest experiments in social engineering in all history.

The Stalinist terror had continued during the war. Entire ethnic groups like the Crimean Tatars and the Volga Germans, suspected of collaboration with the Nazis, were forcibly moved east to Siberia. Mass deportations took place from Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, the three Baltic republics that had been formally annexed in 1940. At the war’s end, returning Soviet soldiers who had been prisoners of war and civilian deportees forced to work for the Nazis in Europe were sent off to labor camps because their exposure to the West made them suspect. The unbridled authority of the secret political police (the NKVD, later the KGB) continued to increase, and the network of forced labor camps grew in size. Ideological restrictions tightened. Stalin’s personal suspicions, growing sharper with the passage of the years, filled even his closest associates with dismay. In later years, in a freer atmosphere, the country debated whether Stalin’s dictatorship represented a logical outgrowth of the Bolshevik Revolution itself and of many of Lenin’s policies or was his own personal distortion.

Controls over intellectual life in the postwar years took on a vehemently nationalistic and xenophobic tone; deviations from Stalin’s “line” in economics, music, genetics, history, and linguistics were forbidden. An officially inspired anti-Semitism, thinly disguised as anti-Zionism, accused Jewish intellectuals of being “rootless cosmopolitans.” The political police meanwhile fabricated conspiracies to justify the terror. In the fictitious “doctors’ plot,” officially announced in early 1953, a score of Jewish doctors were arrested for plotting to poison Stalin and other Kremlin leaders; one month after Stalin died, his successors withdrew the charges and freed the imprisoned physicians.

Khrushchev: The Abortive Effort at Reform

After Stalin’s death the party leaders resolved to exercise collective control, determined that no single leader should again dominate party and government. In the struggle for power, however, authority gradually shifted to Nikita S. Khrushchev. Outwardly jovial and ebullient, Khrushchev was a tough and hardened party stalwart who had enforced Stalin’s purges in Ukraine and had long been a member of the Central Committee and Politburo, but he was shrewd enough to recognize the need for change.

In part to win allies against those in the party who were opposed to change, Khrushchev encouraged a greater measure of cultural and intellectual freedom—a “thaw.” He put restraints on the still formidable powers of the political police. He surprised many with an attack on Stalin’s record. In a speech to the twentieth party congress in 1956, he officially revealed or corroborated the “crimes of the Stalin era,” making partial but nonetheless startling disclosures of the Stalinist terror. Stalin had been personally responsible for the purges and executions of the 1930s, and millions of victims had been innocent of the charges against them; his most intimate colleagues had lived in fear for their lives. Khrushchev also revealed Stalin’s initial loss of nerve and ineptitude at the time of the German invasion in June 1941.

Although Khrushchev criticized Stalin, the thaw in Soviet society was never systematic or thorough. In 1958 Boris Pasternak was forbidden to accept the Nobel Prize in literature because his novel, Dr. Zhivago, by stressing individual freedom, implicitly condemned the oppressiveness of Soviet society. But in 1962 Alexander Solzhenitsyn was permitted to publish his One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, a depiction of human suffering in the world of the forced labor camps. Khrushchev continued the de-Stalinization campaign. Cities named in Stalin’s honor were renamed: Stalingrad, the most famous, became Volgograd. Stalin’s body was removed from the mausoleum on Red Square, where it had lain next to Lenin’s, and buried outside the Kremlin Wall.

For the economy Khrushchev pressed decentralization, attempting to loosen tight central economic controls by creating regional economic councils and offering factory managers greater autonomy and incentives for efficiency and profitability. Meanwhile the country successfully tested the hydrogen bomb; launched its first space satellite, Sputnik, in 1958; and built its first intercontinental ballistic missiles. The Soviet economy was second only to that of the United States in gross national product. Within a decade, Khrushchev boasted in the early 1960s, the Soviet economy would surpass the American. The stress on heavy industry and on military expenditures meant, of course, continuing privation for the ordinary citizen, and the emphasis on quantity to the neglect of quality concealed deep flaws in the system as a whole.

Khrushchev’s most ambitious effort lay in agriculture, the weakest sector of the economy ever since Stalin’s forced collectivization. He sought to bring under cultivation the “virgin lands” of Soviet Central Asia, in Kazakhstan and elsewhere, but crop failures thwarted the experiment. His reforms did little to alter the bureaucratized system of collective and state farms inherited from Stalin or inspire the collective farmers to increase their output. For the party itself he unsuccessfully sought fixed terms of office for important party posts. Few of his reforms were acceptable to the government and party bureaucrats, the apparatchiki, who saw their privileged positions threatened and who mustered opposition to his “hare-brained” schemes.

Khrushchev pursued a truculent foreign policy. Proclaiming that war was not inevitable with the United States and other capitalist countries, he spoke of “peaceful coexistence,” and relations for a time improved. But in 1960 he scuttled a summit meeting with Allied leaders and in 1962 overreached himself in the confrontation with the United States during the Cuban missile crisis (to be described in a subsequent chapter). He also clashed openly with Communist China. His boastfulness and recklessness, his retreat in Cuba, the failure of his agricultural and other economic policies, and his attempt to reform the party itself led to his downfall. In 1964 the party leadership ousted him from office. He lived quietly in Moscow until his death in 1971. In the post-Stalin era, a reformer did not necessarily have to fear for his life, but there were clear limits to the reforms the party and bureaucracy would tolerate. Leonid I. Brezhnev, who had helped engineer Khrushchev’s downfall, soon emerged as the new Soviet leader.

Eastern Europe: The Decades of Dictatorship

Although nothing like the Russian Revolution of 1917 erupted in Europe after the Second World War, communism made dramatic advances in central and eastern Europe through the Red Army’s military presence and the support given to local Communist leaders. Eleven European states and 100 million Europeans fell under Communist-style governments. The areas considered in 1919 by the Allied peacemakers to be a protective buffer against Bolshevism were now under Communist domination.

The three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, came under Soviet control under the terms of the Nazi-Soviet pact, and in 1940 they were incorporated into the U.S.S.R. as Soviet socialist republics. Later, in the sweep of military operations during the last months of the war, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, and Czechoslovakia fell into the orbit of Soviet influence. East Germany, initially part of the joint Allied occupation of Germany, was shaped into a sixth Soviet satellite as the German Democratic Republic. Yugoslavia and Albania, liberated by their own partisan leaders rather than by the Red Army, were governed by Communist regimes but with looser ties to the Soviet Union and soon broke with the Soviets. Despite its defeat in the Soviet-Finnish War in 1940, Finland escaped Communist domination. Accepting its wartime territorial losses, it maintained its independence by a cautious neutrality in foreign policy and a discreetly correct relationship with the Soviets. Austria, after a decade of joint occupation by the four Allied powers, gained independence as a neutral state in 1955.

Consolidation of Communist Control

The Soviets consolidated control in eastern Europe in stages. Soviet military occupation made it possible for local Communist leaders, many returning from exile in Moscow, to dominate Left coalition governments. In the early coalition governments everywhere, the Communists shared power but held the key ministries of interior, propaganda, and justice, and controlled the police, the army, and the courts. Individuals alleged to have been “fascist” or to have collaborated with the Nazis were barred from public life and from voting; the loose definition of “fascist” and “reactionary” barred many who were only anti-Communist. In the first elections, in Poland and elsewhere, purges and disfranchisement made a mockery of Stalin’s pledge at Yalta to hold “free and unfettered elections” in eastern Europe. Protests by the United States and Great Britain only hardened the Soviet position.

The new regimes confiscated and redistributed large estates and put uncultivated land to use, so that 3 million peasant families acquired about 6 million acres of land; the agrarian reforms were the final blow to the landed aristocracy that had once ruled in eastern Europe. They also nationalized the economy. As they struggled with postwar reconstruction, the new regimes had lent a sympathetic ear to the American invitation in 1947 to accept Marshall Plan aid. But Stalin was not disposed to permit the East European countries to drift into the Western economic orbit. After the summer of 1947, wherever non-Communists were still strong, the Communists ousted their political rivals and banned or reduced to impotence all other political parties. In Czechoslovakia the coalition government lasted longer than elsewhere but fell victim to a Communist coup in February 1948.

With the Communists in control, the leaders of the opposition political parties were forced into flight, imprisoned, or in other ways silenced. The new regimes, notably in Poland and Hungary, clashed also with the Roman Catholic church; high-ranking prelates were brought to public trial and imprisoned, and church property was confiscated. The Communist leaders themselves soon became Stalin’s victims. From 1949 to 1953, reflecting the repression in the Soviet Union in Stalin’s last years, purges, arrests, trials, confessions, and executions occurred in the highest ranks of each party. Leaders were accused of nationalist deviations and of conspiring with Tito, the independent-minded Communist leader of Yugoslavia.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1945-1967

              The United Nations is established at a conference in San Francisco
1947          Secretary of State George C. Marshall announces U.S. plan to aid the rebuilding of Europe
1948-1949     American airlift of supplies sustains West Berlin during Soviet blockade 
1949          The Soviet Union successfully tests an atomic bomb
1949          United States and Western Europe create NATO
1949          Mao Zedong and the Communist party proclaim the People’s Republic of China
1950-1953     Korean War demonstrates new American policy to “contain” communism 
1953          Death of Stalin opens new era in Soviet and East European history
1956          Unsuccessful revolts against Soviet control in Poland and Hungary
1957          Six West-European nations establish a new Common Market for trade
1957          Mao launches “Great Leap Forward” in China; leads to deadly famine
1958          France establishes the Fifth Republic with Charles de Gaulle as president
1962          French war in Algeria ends with recognition of Algerian independence
1966-1967     The “Cultural Revolution” creates disruptions throughout China

The new “people’s democracies” took steps to collectivize agriculture. In Bulgaria, the most docile of the satellites, over half the arable land was collectivized; but in Hungary, only about a third. In Poland, where resistance was strongest, collectivization was halted after a short time. Agriculture in the people’s republics, as in the Soviet Union, remained the weakest part of the economy. Peasants diligently cultivated their individual plots of land but worked reluctantly on the large collectives. All of the East European societies also entered a new phase of industrialization. But the emphasis on heavy industry to the neglect of consumer goods and pressures to complement the economy of the Soviet Union severely limited the improvement of East European living standards.

The Soviets formalized their economic relationship with Eastern Europe through the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, but the Council (established in 1949) never worked as cooperation among equals. The Soviets provided low-cost raw materials and oil and provided a large market for East European goods, regardless of their quality, but much of the economic cooperation principally benefited the Soviet Union. Militarily, the Warsaw Pact, signed in 1955, brought the six East European countries together into a mutual defense alliance, and Soviet troops remained stationed in eastern Europe in large numbers.

Yugoslavia, freed from the Nazis largely by its own partisan armies, made a remarkable show of resistance to the Soviets. The Yugoslav Communist leader, Marshal Tito, kept a tight grip on the multinational state but loosened centralized controls over the economy and abandoned collectivization of agriculture. He pursued an independent foreign policy, openly defied Moscow, and took his stand with the neutralist nonaligned nations of Asia and Africa. The first major Communist figure to declare his independence from Moscow, Tito established a model of national autonomy for other Communist leaders and parties to follow.

Ferment and Repression in East Germany, Poland, and Hungary, 1953-1956

The changes in the Soviet Union after Stalin’s death directly affected the Soviet satellites. The East Europeans chafed at collectivization, forced industrialization, austere living standards, subservience to the Soviets, and harsh rale by Stalinist-type leaders who remained in power for years after Stalin disappeared. An initial outburst, riots in East Berlin in June 1953, was quickly suppressed. New ferment rose to the surface, however, after Khrushchev denounced the brutal character of the Stalin dictatorship and, in an attempt to win back Yugoslavia, made the official concession that “different roads to socialism” were possible. This concession and his de-Stalinization speech in 1956 opened a Pandora’s box; undermining Stalin’s infallibility undermined Soviet infallibility as well.

In 1956 open revolt broke out in Poland and Hungary, led by the East European Communist party leaders themselves. In Poland, where national sentiment and church attachments ran deep, pressures for internal freedom and for independence from Moscow led to riots and demonstrations. The Communist leader Wladyslaw Gomulka relaxed political and economic controls, halted collectivization, improved relations with the church, and took steps to loosen the bonds to Moscow. The country welcomed an alternative to direct Soviet control. Khrushchev threatened military action but backed down. For a few years, Gomulka curbed police terror and created a freer atmosphere, but the reform era was short-lived, and Gomulka’s regime controlled Poland with growing repression throughout the 1960s.

In Hungary, in 1956, events took a tragic turn. When news of Gomulka’s success in Poland reached Budapest, demonstrations broke out; young rioters even toppled a statue of Stalin. The reform-minded Communist leader Imre Nagy, who had earlier been driven from the premiership, returned to power. His reform program and release of political prisoners ignited pressures not only for democratization and parliamentary government but also for the severance of ties to Moscow. Alarmed, the Soviets forced the party leadership to remove Nagy from power and to replace him with the more subservient János Kádár, who accepted Soviet intervention. Khrushchev dispatched troops, tanks, and artillery to suppress the “counterrevolution” and forcefully reestablished Communist rule. Severe reprisals followed. Nagy himself was imprisoned, then tried and hanged, and his body was thrown into a mass grave. In the wake of the repression, 200,000 Hungarians fled into exile, mainly to the United States, a larger number than at any time since the crushing of the European revolutions of 1848-1849. The Soviet tanks in Budapest weakened any remaining illusions about the liberalism of Stalin’s successors, provoked international condemnation, and drove many Communists in western Europe and elsewhere to renounce their affiliations with Communist parties.

113. THE COMMUNIST WORLD: MAO ZEDONG AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

The Civil War

The proclamation on October 1, 1949, of the People’s Republic of China by Mao Zedong and the Chinese Communist party was among the most momentous of events shaping the world after 1945.

The long civil war between the Guomindang, or Nationalists, and the Communists had been fought intermittently across much of China since 1927. In 1937 Nationalists and Communists entered into an uneasy alliance to fight the Japanese. Mao agreed to place the People’s Liberation Army under the command of Chiang Kai-shek and the Nationalists, but Mao actually waged a separate guerrilla war against the Japanese from the northern bases he controlled and over which he imposed his own Communist regime, winning peasant support through land reforms. The Nationalists, cut off by the Japanese from the urban centers of eastern China, suffered from chaotic economic conditions and severe inflation and became increasingly corrupt, authoritarian, and repressive.

The victory over Japan in 1945 set the stage for renewed civil war. Nationalist troops, with American aid, returned to eastern China. The Communists, moving out from their guerrilla bases, poured into the northern provinces and made contact with the Russians in Manchuria. When Mao refused to surrender the northern provinces, disband his army, and accept Nationalist political control, the civil war resumed. An American-sponsored truce temporarily halted hostilities, but when the U.S.S.R. withdrew from Manchuria in the spring of 1946 (after removing Manchurian industrial assets as reparations), Nationalists and Communists clashed over control of Manchuria.

In the fighting from 1946 to 1949, the Nationalists, despite substantial American support, lost ground steadily. By the autumn of 1949 the Communists had routed the demoralized Guomindang armies. Chiang withdrew his shattered forces to the island of Taiwan, where he established a small but soon prospering Republic of China. The mainland regime never gave up its claim to Taiwan, and the fate of Taiwan remained a contentious international issue for later generations. In 1971 Taiwan had to surrender to the People’s Republic of China the Chinese seat in the United Nations, which also carried with it permanent membership on the Security Council.

【此节有大量删除，待补充】Mao: The New Regime

From 1949 until his death in 1976, Chairman Mao, as uncontested head of the party, molded the destinies of China. Much more is known about him now than at the time. He had earlier imposed his iron rule on the party and on the populations under his control. He had ruthlessly eliminated all party rivals in periodic purges during the long struggle with the Guomindang. Having finally gained power over all of China, he was determined to bring about the total transformation of the agrarian and undeveloped Chinese society, which had been the victim of foreign intervention and invasion for well over a century. Mao wanted to create a new proud China in which the social order of domineering landlords and oppressed peasants would be reversed, the country would be industrialized and modernized, and China would be internationally respected. In many ways he personified the Chinese resentment of Western imperialism, which had humiliated China and all but carved the country to pieces in the nineteenth century. He was resolved to set China on the path to modernity, no matter what the cost.

In 1949, for the first time since the revolution of 1911, and indeed for generations before that, a unified central government controlled China, able to direct and mobilize the most populous nation in the world. Even before the Communist triumph Chairman Mao, despite his modest title, already saw himself as something of a successor to the ancient Chinese emperors. He would link Marx’s world view, which since 1920 he had adopted as the instrument for Chinese liberation, to the 4,000-year-old imperial tradition of an all-powerful emperor ruling together with mandarin scholar-officials. The traditional emperor was to rule with the mandate of Heaven in accordance with Confucian moral precepts, as interpreted by his learned officials. They were obligated to criticize the emperor, but if they went too far they could meet a grim end—in ancient times buried alive. The new regime inherited also an ancient tradition of Chinese preeminence in the East Asian world. With traditional ways of life disrupted by decades of revolution, civil struggle, and the war against Japan, Mao’s communism in some ways provided a modern surrogate for the older Confucian values.

Mao leaned heavily on Soviet experience. The Communist party controlled and policed each level of government and manipulated all organs of information and political indoctrination.



Mao relentlessly mobilized the nation to rebuild the war-devastated economy and then to transform the country into an industrial power. Eliminating the old land regime in the countryside, the party established agricultural cooperatives as a prelude to collectivization. The country’s first Five-Year Plan, launched in 1953 with Soviet economic and technical assistance during an initial period of friendly relations, concentrated on heavy industry, with significant results even if all targets were not reached. In agriculture the same floods and droughts that had troubled China for centuries refused to obey government decrees.

Impatient with what he considered the slow progress of social change, Mao in 1957 launched the “Great Leap Forward,” designed to transform the country’s industry and agriculture more rapidly. The program adopted by the Communist party proclaimed that China would “catch up with Britain” in a few years’ time. The cooperatives in the countryside were amalgamated into larger “people’s communes.” Tightly organized in military fashion as production brigades, they were responsible for mechanizing production on the farms and developing local rural industry. Communal kitchens, nurseries, and schools left women freer to work on an equal basis in the fields and factories. Borrowing from some of the discredited Soviet experiments of Stalin, the government ordered farmers to abandon their traditional farming and to plant grain and rice everywhere, whether in suitable soil or not, and to crossbreed crops. Farmers were also encouraged to set up metallurgical furnaces in their backyards and learn to make steel.

But the industrial sector made progress. In the years before the Communist regime, annual steel production had never reached 1 million tons; by 1960 it exceeded 18 million. China’s industrial output in 1960 ranked among the top ten powers in the world, and its factories had created a base for further expansion. The government also marshaled the country’s scientific and technological talents for the new technological age. It successfully tested an atomic bomb in 1964 and a hydrogen bomb in 1967, and it orbited space satellites in the 1970s.

The regime transformed modern Chinese life in many ways. Road, rail, and air transport physically unified the country. Public sanitation and public health received a high national priority. Labor gangs systematically drained and filled snail-infested canals, curbing the spread of diseases like schistosomiasis. Progress was made in overcoming illiteracy. The government reformed and simplified the written Chinese language and moved toward a single spoken tongue. It also adopted a new transliteration system for spelling Chinese names and words in the Latin alphabet. Women, encouraged to reject traditional Confucian virtues of obedience and deference, received legal equality with men and could count on new opportunities, even if few entered the higher ranks of political power. Old abuses such as child marriage and concubinage were outlawed; foot-binding had been eliminated earlier in the century. More profoundly than the Russian, the Chinese Revolution refashioned the habits and ethos of a gigantic population, reaching remote villages and hamlets untouched for centuries. Within a generation an agrarian, semifeudal country was developing into a modern industrial society. Mao’s transformation was succeeding— at tremendous cost, to be sure.