Chapter 25

COEXISTENCE, CONFRONTATION, AND THE NEW GLOBAL ECONOMY

121. Confrontation and Détente, 1955-1975

122. Collapse and Recovery of the Global Economy: The 1970s and 1980s

123. The Cold War Rekindled

124. China after Mao

We must turn from our account of the new and emerging nations of the world, which at times has carried us into the twenty-first century, to the international political tensions and the vicissitudes of the global economy in the decades following the early postwar era. By the late 1950s western Europe and Japan had drawn on American aid and their own technical expertise to rebuild their war-damaged cities and factories. Responding to the new challenges of a bipolar world and the global ambitions of two competing superpowers, western Europe had joined more closely together economically in the evolving European Community and buried many of its old antagonisms. Regions of the world that formerly were part of European colonial empires were everywhere asserting their independence. China was positioning itself as another major Communist power. The global economy grew increasingly interdependent and the vicissitudes of economic expansion and contraction reverberated worldwide. Older distinctions became blurred. The emergence of Japan made it impossible to identify industrial and financial might with the West, and even the Soviet bloc expanded its trade and financial exchanges with non-communist countries.

Yet the Cold War continued to manifest itself in an escalating nuclear arms race and in the worldwide confrontation of the two superpowers, each of which attempted to prevent the other from gaining the ascendancy. The stockpiling of nuclear arms and the development of sophisticated long-range delivery systems led to the accumulation of unparalleled destructive power. The nuclear missiles supposedly were built for deterrence and not for use, and a new kind of balance of power emerged that preserved the peace. The world nonetheless lived under the threat of a possible nuclear catastrophe, and neither economic nor intellectual life could fully escape from the global shadow of the Cold War.

As time passed, the phenomenon of “bipolarity,” or the predominance of the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, gradually gave way to new global configurations. But while the charged atmosphere lasted, despite periods of detente, the world was forced to live with repeated crises. As late as 1985 no one could foresee how or when the Cold War would end.

12 CONFRONTATION AND DETENTE, 1955-1975

The Soviet leaders who succeeded Stalin after 1953 seemed at times more conciliatory and willing to acknowledge the need for arms control and cooperation in the nuclear age. An alternative of peaceful coexistence and competing world systems promised to open up, and there were even recognizable periods of detente, or formal relaxation of tensions. But dangerous confrontations recurred, the nuclear arms buildup assumed unprecedented forms and dimensions, and relations seesawed over the next several decades between conciliation and crisis.

By 1955 the Cold War had stabilized. In Asia the Korean War was over. In Europe the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), strengthened by the West German armed forces, faced the Warsaw Pact nations. The iron curtain still divided Europe, but the threat of direct military confrontation receded. The Western powers and the Soviet Union were even able to agree in 1955 on a treaty with Austria, ending the joint Allied occupation and leaving Austria independent and neutral.

We have seen how Khrushchev had emerged as the dominant Soviet leader. Sharp-tongued, volatile, boastful, he announced that the Soviets would abandon their revolutionary principles only “when shrimp learn to whistle” and pledged that the Soviets would “bury” Western capitalism. Nonetheless he rejected the inevitability of war and emphasized the “possibility and necessity of peaceful coexistence.” President Eisenhower, in office from 1953 to 1961, continued the policy of containment and the American military buildup. Eisenhower’s secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, who saw the Cold War in almost apocalyptic terms as a Manichean contest between good and evil, at one point urged a “rollback” of Soviet power. Despite his rhetoric, and despite active American military support for anti-Communist forces in Central America, Asia, Africa, and elsewhere, American policy remained limited to containment. Both superpowers recognized the need for coexistence in the nuclear age.

In 1955 President Eisenhower, along with the British and French, met at Geneva with Soviet leaders in a friendlier atmosphere than any since the Second World War. Although they reached no new agreements, the American president could speak of “a new spirit of conciliation and cooperation.” But tensions mounted over Berlin. The Soviets, incensed that East Germans were fleeing in large numbers to West Berlin and then to the Federal Republic of Germany, demanded that the Western powers end their occupation of West Berlin, but Eisenhower forcefully rejected the ultimatum, and the crisis passed. In 1959, when Khrushchev visited President Eisenhower at his weekend retreat in Camp David, they spoke of peaceful coexistence and even of mutual disarmament.

At a second summit conference in Paris, the superpowers continued to recognize their common interests in preserving stability and peace. But by then Khrushchev, under criticism at home and from Mao in China for being too conciliatory toward the West, produced irrefutable evidence of American reconnaissance flights over Soviet territory and broke up the conference. By the summer of 1960 the “spirit of Geneva” and the “spirit of Camp David” had faded. When Khrushchev spoke before the United Nations, he boasted of Soviet arms production and denounced the United States. Crises over Berlin and elsewhere were far from settled.

The United States, unwavering in its resolve to maintain the defense of western Europe, accepted Soviet hegemony east of the iron curtain. The Americans protested but did not intervene when in 1953 the Soviets put down antigovemment riots in East Berlin, or when in 1956 the Soviets exerted pressure on Poland to curb its reform movement, or when the Soviets, even more dramatically, sent troops and tanks that year to crush the Hungarian revolt, or later, in 1968, the Czech uprising. The United States offered little more than moral encouragement to dissident groups in all of these eastern European states.

At the same time one part of the world after another was being brought into the American strategic defense system. In the Suez crisis in 1956 (which broke out simultaneously with the troubles in Hungary) the United States deterred Britain, France, and Israel from pressing military action against Egypt, at least in part because it might have encouraged Soviet intervention. The three countries were frustrated, but the Soviets were kept out. The “Eisenhower Doctrine” asserted American primacy in the defense of the Middle East and pledged protection to any government in that region against “international Communism.” Under that policy, Eisenhower dispatched marines to Jordan and Lebanon in 1958 when their pro-Western governments were threatened. In the Western Hemisphere the United States rallied the Latin American republics to resist domination or control of any American state by the “international Communist movement.” American foreign policy in the Cold War remained based on the premise that unrest on every continent was Soviet-inspired. That premise sometimes prevented Americans from understanding the complex local causes of regional conflicts around the world.

The nuclear arms race continued. In October 1957 the Soviets, to the world’s astonishment, demonstrated their prowess in the new era of rocket technology when they successfully launched Sputnik, the first artificial satellite to orbit in outer space. A few months later the United States launched its own space satellite, Explorer I. The space age had opened, and the military implications of space rocketry quickly became apparent. The same principles of propulsion could launch both satellites and armed missiles over long distances. In 1958 the Soviets developed the first intercontinental ballistic missile (or ICBM) capable of delivering nuclear warheads to North America and elsewhere thousands of miles away. The United States in turn developed its own intercontinental ballistic missiles and proceeded to build an arsenal of nuclear weapons far larger than that of the Soviets.

A new kind of arms race, based on “mutual deterrence,” emerged; it was useless to speak of “massive retaliation.” Now that American cities were vulnerable to nuclear destruction, anxiety spread in western Europe that the United States might not so readily defend it. De Gaulle, the French president, voiced these and other misgivings in the 1960s and called for a more independent role for the West Europeans. Rejecting the rigid bipolar patterns of the Cold War and viewing postwar international relations as a traditional struggle between great powers rather than as a conflict of ideologies, he called for a return to a more open recognition of spheres of national interest and for Europe’s reunification—“from the Atlantic to the Urals.” He declined to follow the American lead in foreign policy in Europe or elsewhere. Although he kept France in the Atlantic alliance, in a gesture of independence he withdrew France from the integrated NATO military command in 1966 and pressured NATO into moving its headquarters from French soil. His aspirations for a leadership role on the international scene troubled many Europeans, but he nevertheless articulated European uneasiness with American hegemony over the West in world affairs.

The Kennedy Years, 196i-1963

The gravest direct Soviet-American confrontations came during the Kennedy presidency. President John F. Kennedy heightened the rhetoric of the Cold War, proclaiming that the United States “had to pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any

friend or oppose any foe in order to assure the success and survival of liberty.” He took steps to close what was termed the “missile gap.” Alarmed by Soviet successes in space, he pledged that the Americans would reach the moon before the end of the decade and encouraged large expenditures for space exploration. At the same time Kennedy increased foreign aid to the developing countries and sponsored the Peace Corps, which took young Americans to Latin America, Asia, and Africa to aid in social and economic development programs designed to improve life and reduce the attractions of communism. For Latin America, which resented the large sums that had gone to Europe, he organized the Alliance for Progress to encourage investment and growth.

In Cuba, Kennedy inherited an explosive situation. Many in the United States and elsewhere had initially regarded Fidel Castro as a progressive leader favorably disposed to democracy and committed to much needed change in a country where a dictatorship had long kept the population impoverished and repressed. But Castro, no simple reformer, inaugurated a sweeping agrarian program, expropriated large American corporate holdings, and imprisoned or executed political opponents. Thousands of Cubans fled to the United States, settling in large numbers around Miami. Although Castro originally kept his movement aloof from the Cuban Communist party, he now openly joined ranks with the Communists. President Eisenhower, who dealt with Castro’s leftist regime before Kennedy came to office, became alarmed by the threat of communism in the Western Hemisphere and imposed a strict embargo on imports from Cuba. Castro for his part moved closer to the Soviet Union. Within a short time, four-fifths of Cuban trade was with the Soviets and eastern Europe. The United States broke off diplomatic relations, and the CIA secretly trained a small group of Cuban refugees for an armed invasion of the island.

Kennedy inherited the plans for the invasion and, without seriously reassessing the situation resolved to go forward with it to end the Communist menace 90 miles from the American mainland. The invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, without adequate air protection, turned into a failure; most of the 1,500 invaders were captured. Castro now inflated his revolutionary rhetoric, openly projected himself as a Marxist-Leninist, affirmed the country’s ties with the Soviet Union, and championed the cause of international revolution throughout Latin America and elsewhere. The United States tightened its embargo.

At a meeting with Kennedy in Vienna that year, Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, delivered a new ultimatum for the Western powers to leave Berlin. Kennedy, smarting over the Bay of Pigs defeat, reaffirmed the Western resolve to remain in Berlin. He asked Congress to expand American military forces, inaugurated a civil defense program, and made plans for fall-out shelters in the event of nuclear war. The Atlantic alliance backed him. The immediate crisis passed. But in the summer of 1961 the Soviets, exasperated at the continuing exodus from East Berlin (over 3 million East Germans had already fled), constructed the Berlin Wall, a 28-mile rampart of concrete and barbed wire, with armed sentry stations. The Wall stood as a grim physical reminder of the Cold War; hundreds of East Germans who attempted to cross the barrier met their deaths. The Soviet Union also ended a three-year moratorium on nuclear testing; both countries resumed tests underground and in the atmosphere.

The Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962

The most dangerous Western-Soviet confrontation occurred not in Berlin but in Cuba, where in the fall of 1962 Khrushchev showed an unanticipated recklessness. Announcing his intention to defend Cuba against a second American invasion (plans for which existed), he dispatched Soviet soldiers and technicians to the island to construct missile sites that would have brought the American mainland within target range. For the United States this Soviet intrusion on America’s own doorstep was unthinkable and could even inalterably change the nuclear balance between the two superpowers.

During 13 tense days in October President Kennedy and his advisers resolved not to take any hasty military action but to stand firm against the Soviet military presence in Cuba, fully aware that the showdown could lead to nuclear war. Kennedy imposed a blockade (or quarantine) of the island, forbidding further deliveries of arms and supplies. The launching of any nuclear missile from Cuba, he made clear, would lead to a “full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.” At the height of the emergency American planes carrying nuclear bombs were airborne. Although Khrushchev blustered that the blockade was illegal, he backed down; on October 24 two Soviet ships and their submarine escort turned back. In one note Khrushchev agreed to remove the missile sites in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba. In a second note, more aggressive in tone, he demanded the removal of American missile sites in Turkey. Kennedy replied only to the first message, but privately let it be known that the United States would eventually remove its missiles in Turkey. By October 28 the most ominous crisis of the Cold War, an “eyeball-to-eyeball” confrontation, as the American Secretary of State Dean Rusk described it, was over.

Khrushchev had lost face; he was weakened still further at home, and in 1964, for this and for other reasons, he was ousted from power. The People’s Republic of China, which was assuming the role of spokesman for the Third World, ridiculed his capitulation in the Cuban missile confrontation. Even though tensions once again eased, and the Soviet leaders would never again show such recklessness, the Cuban crisis had a direct effect on the arms race. Both the Soviet Union and the United States moved to expand their nuclear arsenals, and the Soviets under Khrushchev’s successors were determined to achieve nuclear parity.

The United States and the Vietnam War

The resolve to contain Communist expansion entangled the United States in deepening hostilities in Southeast Asia. In Vietnam, as we have seen, the Communist leader Ho Chi Minh had led an anticolonial war against the French that lasted over eight years, from 1946 to 1954. After France acknowledged its military defeat, an international conference at Geneva in 1954 formally recognized the independence of Vietnam (temporarily dividing it into a northern and southern sector), as well as the independence of Laos and Cambodia, all part of former French Indochina.

But in Vietnam Communists and anti-Communists now confronted each other in a divided country. In the north Ho Chi Minh consolidated his Communist regime, its capital at Hanoi. A Western-backed regime under Ngo Dinh Diem governed the south, its capital in Saigon. Neither regime wanted a divided country, but the Geneva conference had partitioned Vietnam at the 17th parallel until general elections for a unified country could be held in 1956. In the interval the armies of the rival regimes were to withdraw behind the stipulated boundary, across which there was to be free movement of peoples. In the months that followed, close to 1 million Vietnamese fled southward. In South Vietnam a referendum in 1955 established an independent republic.

The government in South Vietnam, already aware that the Communists had acquired a large popular following in the wars against the Japanese and French, refused to participate in the scheduled countrywide elections. Communist guerrilla forces, known as the Viet Cong, who had stayed behind when the main army withdrew under the 1954 Geneva agreement, began a campaign to undermine the South Vietnamese government. The National Liberation Front emerged as a rival civil authority. Skilled in insurgent warfare, the Viet Cong won popular support by distributing land and by denouncing South Vietnam as a puppet of the West. Regular army units from North Vietnam soon reinforced the Communist guerrilla units in the south. Ho Chi Minh, while never sacrificing his political independence, received generous aid for his regime from the U.S.S.R. and from the People’s Republic of China. South Vietnam, hard-pressed despite technical advice and assistance from the United States, appealed for more and more American aid.

The United States, from President Eisenhower on, saw a need to fill the vacuum created by the French withdrawal and to check Communist expansion in Indochina. To prevent the other states in Southeast Asia from toppling one by one—“like a tumbling row of dominoes,” in his phrase—Eisenhower sent some limited aid and military advisers, but Kennedy further bolstered the Diem regime with additional military advisers, financial backing, and arms. The United States acted on the premise that this was not a civil war among the Vietnamese but a war between two independent states, one anti-Communist and therefore to be supported, and the other Communist, receiving aid and support from the Soviet Union and Communist China. Vietnam was seen as part of the global struggle between communism and democracy. While the repressive character of the regime in the north was apparent, the southern regime’s authoritarian practices, ineptitude, corruption, and acts of coercion, especially against its large Buddhist population, became increasingly embarrassing to its American sponsors.

American involvement deepened and spanned the administrations of five presidents, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, and Ford. Under Eisenhower a few hundred military advisers were present, and military and economic aid began; as early as 1959 two American military advisers were killed in an attack north of Saigon. In 1961, under Kennedy, additional military advisers and American support troops arrived; a year later 4,000 military personnel were on hand, and the first battle deaths were reported. The Kennedy administration, through the CIA, intervened in South Vietnamese politics; the Americans first propped up and then in 1963 helped to overthrow the increasingly repressive government of Diem, in the course of which Diem and his brother were murdered.

After Kennedy’s assassination in November 1963, and the succession of Lyndon B. Johnson to the presidency, American military intervention in Vietnam gained added momentum. In 1964, on the alleged ground that North Vietnamese torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin had attacked United States destroyers, an allegation that later proved unfounded, Johnson ordered immediate air strikes against North Vietnam and secured support for a joint congressional resolution empowering him to take “all necessary measures” to defend the United States and its ally. The Gulf of Tonkin resolution was the only explicit congressional sanction for the deepening American involvement. In 1965 American marines arrived. After 1965 heavy air raids on supply bases in the north and on Communist-controlled areas in the south became an almost daily occurrence. American bombers attacked as far north as Hanoi.

To root out the elusive Viet Cong in the countryside, American soldiers conducted “search and destroy” missions among the villagers, and American planes dropped incendiary materials and chemicals, burning whole villages, defoliating hundreds of thousands of acres of land, and turning the survivors into homeless refugees. The bombing raids, the commitment of American ground troops, and the casualties mounted. In 1966 there were close to 200,000 American troops in Vietnam; by 1969 at their maximum there were close to 550,000. In the massive bombings from 1965 to 1969 the Americans dropped more tons of explosives than against the Axis powers in the Second World War.

The large-scale American military intervention was unable to overcome the persistence of the North Vietnamese, aided by the Soviet Union, which never directly intervened with combat troops but lent assistance of other kinds. American military reports about the “pacification” of the countryside and about the number of enemy casualties (or “body counts”) were confounded by the Communists’ Tet, or New Year’s, offensive at the opening of 1968.

Although unsuccessful, the scale of the Communist offensive shook American complacency about the outcome of the war. To many it became clear that a negotiated settlement would be necessary.

America’s allies in western Europe were critical of the deepening American involvement. De Gaulle, a moralizer when it suited his purposes, called it “detestable” for “a great nation to ravage a small one.” In the United States the war became a root cause of disorders and protests on college campuses and in the cities. Criticism of American policy added fuel to the worldwide student demonstrations of 1968. A wide array of public opinion turned against the war. Some opponents raised larger issues. They questioned whether the United States, despite its enormous strength, should assume the responsibility, or even had the capability, to police the world against Communist aggression; whether the American presence in Vietnam was an unwanted foreign intervention reminiscent of Western intrusion in the age of imperialism; whether the South Vietnamese regime could be stabilized and democratized to make the sacrifices worthwhile; and whether the air raids and continued hostilities might not end in the tragic devastation of the unfortunate country. Some critics with a knowledge of Asian history argued that the Vietnamese had a long record of independence and that even a Vietnam united under the Communists would not lead to subordination to the Soviets, or to China, with which Vietnam historically had had many differences.

The need to win the war became an obsession with President Johnson. Like his predecessors, he was convinced that it was in America’s vital interest to contain communism in Southeast Asia; otherwise the Communists would be “in Hawaii and next they will be in San Francisco.” Like his predecessors, he too refused to repeat what he took to be the lessons of appeasement of the 1930s. Above all, he could not see himself presiding over the first war lost by the United States, even when the war jeopardized his unquestionably important domestic reform program. But with victory remote, and with resentment against the war rising, he decided not to seek reelection in 1968 and announced a halt to the bombing in the north so that peace negotiations could go forward. By November 1968 all bombing ceased—for a time.

Peace talks opened in Paris even though the fighting went on. Johnson’s successor, President Nixon, pledged an early end to the war, promised “Vietnamization,” that is, to shift to South Vietnam the major responsibility for its own defense, so that American troops could begin to withdraw. Yet the United States in the next three years in some ways became even more deeply involved. In response to stalemated peace talks and continuing Communist advances, Nixon and his national security adviser and later secretary of state, Henry Kissinger, called for the resumption of heavy air attacks and widened the war by invading Cambodia to cut off North Vietnamese supply lines. The war spread to Laos as well.

Demonstrations mounted in the United States at the widening of the unpopular war. Meanwhile Kissinger opened up secret talks with North Vietnam representatives and finally brought about a cease-fire agreement in January 1973. The agreement ended direct military involvement for the United States and concluded the longest war—like the Korean, an undeclared one—the country had ever fought. Over eight years elapsed from the arrival of the first Marine contingent in 1965 to the withdrawal of the last troops at the end of March 1973, or 12 years, if the involvement is dated from 1961.

Following the withdrawal of American troops, hostilities between North and South Vietnam continued as each sought additional territory before a final settlement was reached. Both sides violated the cease-fire, and fighting resumed on a major scale in 1973. Although the administration remained committed to the defense of South Vietnam, Congress refused additional expenditures for military aid. Corruption and demoralization in South Vietnam grew worse; army desertions mounted. The end, nevertheless, came as a surprise. At the close of 1974, the North Vietnamese captured key cities in the southern provinces. The government of South Vietnam lost heart and ordered withdrawal to the coast; a planned retreat degenerated into rout. North Vietnam, with victory in its grasp, poured thousands of troops south across the demilitarized zone. Swarms of refugees fleeing south added to the confusion. By April 1975 North Vietnam’s armies controlled three-fourths of South Vietnam, and Saigon fell.

North Vietnamese troops entered Saigon and renamed the capital Ho Chi Minh City in honor of the Communist leader who had meanwhile died in 1969. After more than 30 years of almost continuous fighting—against the Japanese, against the French, and in the civil war between north and south in which the United States had massively intervened— peace had finally come to the country, and with it Communist victory. Reunification and reorganization of the country proceeded quickly. The new regime launched a “political reeducation” campaign, nationalized property, and forcibly moved large numbers of the population from the cities to the countryside. Thousands, mostly ethnic Chinese, tried to flee in makeshift, overcrowded boats, many perishing in the attempt or discovering that the countries which they reached would not offer them a haven.

In the wake of North Vietnam’s victory, Cambodia and Laos also fell under Communist control. Thirty years after the end of the Second World War, all of former French Indochina was in Communist hands, and a reunified Vietnam emerged as a new military power in Southeast Asia.

The Vietnam War was extremely costly for the Vietnamese people; 1.3 million Vietnamese died in the fighting and bombings. For the United States the war was a searing experience. Battle and battle-related deaths exceeded 58,000, higher than in the Korean War. The domestic impact of the military expenditures was heightened by the failure to place taxes on a wartime basis, contributing to inflationary pressures. The political and moral costs were enormous. The war created a mistrust of presidential power in the United States—of an “imperial presidency.” In 1973 Congress adopted legislation to curb presidential initiatives that could lead to future episodes like the war in Vietnam. The war had left Americans with a disturbing series of painful images and memories: the deadly bombings, the gruesome battle scenes visible in the first war reported in detail on television, the revelation of atrocities and war crimes committed by American troops (as at My Lai in 1968, first covered up and then made the subject of a public inquiry and trial), and the demoralization of veterans, who were convinced that their sacrifices in the unpopular war had brought them little recognition. America’s giant industrial and military power had failed to bring victory. Technological superiority in armaments and air power proved inadequate against an enemy skilled in insurgent warfare and imbued with a revolutionary zeal.

The travail of Southeast Asia did not end. During the war North Vietnam had infiltrated border areas of Cambodia and helped arm Communist insurgents, the Khmer Rouge, which, after a lengthy civil war, overthrew the Cambodian government. In 1975 the leader of the Cambodian Communists, the ruthless Pol Pot, subjected Cambodia to brutal dictatorship and grisly terror; an unknown number, but over 2 million people, died in the small Buddhist country from 1975 to 1978 as a result of mass executions, forced labor, and famine.

The Khmer Rouge turned out to be more pro-Chinese than suited Vietnam or the Soviet Union. In 1979 Vietnam invaded Cambodia and overthrew the Pol Pot regime: China took retaliatory steps, but could not force Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia until the Soviets themselves encouraged the Vietnamese withdrawal in the late 1980s. Ancient rivalries between China and Vietnam and between Vietnam and Cambodia, as well as tensions between the Soviet Union and China, prolonged the agonies of Southeast Asia. There was no monolithic communism in this part of the globe, where nationalism was as important as Communism in shaping the violent conflicts of the postcolonial era.

Brezhnev: The "Prague Spring"

Leonid I. Brezhnev, who emerged as the dominant Soviet leader after Khrushchev’s fall from power in 1964 and came to head both party and state, was intent, with reckless disregard for the costs to the economy, on building the country’s military and naval strength to compete with the United States. Yet he avoided direct confrontation and saw political and economic advantages in a relaxation of tensions and arms negotiations. The open rift with Communist China made detente with the West even more important. But the two superpowers continued to vie with each other for influence in the Middle East, Africa, and other strategic areas of the world; and the Soviets consolidated their hold on eastern Europe.

Despite the failure of the Hungarian uprising in 1956, the longing for freedom and independence in eastern Europe could not be suppressed. When in 1968 the reforms of Alexander Dubček threatened the one-party state in Czechoslovakia, Brezhnev and the party leadership ruthlessly crushed the “Prague spring.” They dispatched 250,000 troops, including token Polish, Hungarian, and East German contingents, to suppress the incipient revolution and remove Dubček and his reformist allies from power. The “Brezhnev Doctrine” that year proclaimed the Soviet right to intervene in the name of “proletarian internationalism” in any Communist country to protect “socialism” against “internal or external forces” and prevent the “restoration of a capitalist regime.” It was in its own way a kind of mirror image of the Truman Doctrine. Czechoslovakia returned to a tight dictatorship ruled by party bosses with close ties to Moscow. The United States did no more than protest the armed intervention in Czechoslovakia, demonstrating once again that it would not openly challenge Soviet control over eastern Europe in what was tacitly accepted as a sphere of Soviet influence. But the invasion of Czechoslovakia, like the suppression of the 1956 Hungarian uprising, alienated the Communist faithful in many parts of the world and undermined the Soviet leadership of Western Communist parties, which strongly denounced the military intervention.

Brezhnev and Nixon

Although President Nixon, who took office in 1969, continued and even intensified the war in Vietnam, he introduced greater flexibility into the American policy of containment and pursued a policy of systematic detente in the Cold War. With Kissinger (and somewhat like de Gaulle) he believed in the balance of power diplomacy of an earlier age, and he assumed that each country’s long-range national self-interest and geopolitical concerns should count more than ideology. The growing importance of the People’s Republic of China had to be recognized. The United States would be unable to curb Soviet expansion altogether, but it could offer economic concessions and other inducements for cooperation and peace.

Under the Nixon-Kissinger policy the United States linked Western technology, trade, and investment to Soviet cooperation in international affairs. The economic inducements were important because the Soviet Union’s economic difficulties were aggravated by its growing arms burden. Khrushchev’s earlier boast of surpassing the West economically had proved hollow. The Soviets badly needed Western technology, Western investment credits, and, because of their persistent agricultural crises, Western grain. In the new atmosphere American and West European private bankers made large loans to the East European nations, which benefited even more than the Soviets from detente. The two Germanys moved closer together in economic relations, recognized each other diplomatically, and were admitted to the United Nations in 1973 as two separate sovereign states.

The Nixon-Kissinger policies developed out of a reassessment of global realities. Unlike the bipolar situation in 1945 when there were only two superpowers, there were now other emergent power centers, and the most important of them was the People’s Republic of China. In 1971 the United States withdrew its objections to the entry of the People’s Republic of China into the United Nations as a replacement for Taiwan, although it would still recognize “two Chinas” and work toward their peaceful reunification one day as “one country, two systems.” Then in an unannounced move in 1972, after careful secret preparations, Nixon, who had built his domestic political career on anticommunism, took the dramatic step of visiting Mao in Beijing to initiate diplomatic and economic relations with China.

The American opening to China increased pressure on the Soviets to pursue d6tente. The Soviet arms buildup under Brezhnev signified that the Soviets were approaching nuclear parity, and both the United States and the Soviet Union found it to their advantage to negotiate arms reduction. The Strategic Arms Limitation (or SALT) talks begun under President Johnson were resumed. In 1972 Nixon and the Soviet leaders reaffirmed the goal of “peaceful coexistence” and signed the SALT I treaty. Each nation agreed to reduce its antimissile defense system to make it possible to work toward equality in offensive weapons. They agreed also to hold offensive weapons to a fixed number for a period of five years. The treaty did not halt the arms race, but it reduced fears on both sides of a preemptive strike and promised continued negotiations. After Nixon resigned from the presidency in 1974 following the Watergate scandal, detente continued under his successor, President Gerald Ford.

Detente offered an opportunity to settle or phase out some unresolved issues of the Second World War. In 1975, in what resembled a peace conference for Europe, three decades after the Second World War had ended, 35 nations—the 16 members of NATO, the 7 Warsaw Pact states, and 12 European countries not formally members of either alliance—met at Helsinki over a period of two years in a Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. They pledged to work for peace, economic and cultural cooperation, and the protection of human rights. The Helsinki accords, although not a formal treaty, ratified the European territorial boundaries established after the Second World War and set up “Helsinki watch committees” for the surveillance of human rights in nations that signed the agreements. The U.S.S.R. considered the commitment to human rights a small price to pay in exchange for the economic and other benefits of détente. It still expected to keep strict limits on dissent within its own country and in its East European satellites, but it failed to see how much the Helsinki accords would encourage dissenters to defy repression. The Helsinki conference was the high point of Cold War détente; not long thereafter, in 1979, Soviet-Western relations took another downward turn. But we must first turn to the changing world economy, to which the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc were now more closely tied than ever before.

122. COLLAPSE AND RECOVERY OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY: THE 1970S AND 1980S

Interdependence is a form of dependency, and the expansion of the global economy after the Second World War made each country more vulnerable to events in distant places. In 1974, after two and a half decades of spectacular growth, the Western economic boom came to an abrupt end. Signs of economic slowdown and inflationary pressures were already visible in the late 1960s, and recession might have occurred in any event, but it was the oil embargo growing out of the Arab-Israeli war in the autumn of 1973 that precipitated the crisis.

Oil had replaced coal as a major source of energy. Readily available at low prices, it came primarily from the vast reserves of the Middle East and was transported easily and economically by tanker through the Persian Gulf and Suez Canal. The major international oil companies, mostly American, for a long time controlled prices and production, and purchasers paid for the oil in dollars. The Western economies, the Japanese, and others in Asia had come to depend on cheap oil. In 1960, 14 of the oil-exporting countries in the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America formed the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (or OPEC) to curb the monopoly concessions enjoyed by foreign companies and to assume a larger share of authority over production and prices.

Within OPEC the Arab states of the Middle East were the most assertive. The oil issue turned intensely political during the Arab-Israeli war of October 1973 when the Arab oil-producing states embargoed the shipment of oil to states accused of supporting Israel. The OPEC cartel cut back production and quadrupled oil prices. Apprehension spread in western Europe and Japan, and in the United States, which needed foreign oil to supplement its domestic resources. Never had an essential commodity risen in price so rapidly; the entire global industrial complex seemed vulnerable. The oil shortage and the price escalation, coming on the heels of the international monetary difficulties and devaluations of the dollar in 1971-1973, sharply increased the balance of payment deficits for all oil-importing countries, undermined currencies, accelerated an inflationary spiral already underway, and seriously interrupted the spectacular growth of the West European economies.

The immediate panic caused by the oil embargo passed, but prices remained at a much higher level. Later in the decade, in 1979, a second oil crisis occurred when Iran, in the midst of its revolution, halted oil exports and the OPEC cartel again doubled prices. In the 1980s the Iran-Iraq War once more reduced global oil supplies and threatened the free movement of tankers through the Persian Gulf, prompting the United States and other Western countries to take naval action. Eventually, however, the oil cartel proved less cohesive and intimidating than originally feared. Additional energy resources became available. After the discovery of oil in the North Sea, Britain and Norway became exporters of oil. The Netherlands and other countries turned to natural gas; France, to nuclear energy. Many countries initiated energy conservation measures. When prices declined in the 1980s as a result of falling demand, oil-producing countries like Nigeria and Mexico found themselves deeply in debt because they had geared their economies and government expenditures to the sale of high-priced oil. The decline in oil revenues led to restlessness in the Arab states, and later events in the Middle East showed the critical role that oil and oil prices continued to play in international affairs.

The Recession: Stagnation and Inflation

The recession that began in 1974 was severe, although it never approximated the depths of the Great Depression. What set it apart from previous economic declines was the accompanying inflation, which raced on in major industrial countries at double-digit annual figures.

In some European countries the annual rate of inflation rose to over 20 percent; it reached 27 percent in Britain in 1975. In the United States prices doubled over the course of the decade. For a time economic growth ground to a standstill in western Europe. By the late 1970s the recession was worldwide. Bankruptcies shook several countries; production declined; economic growth slowed or even halted. Over 10 percent of the American and West European labor force were unemployed. From a low point of 3.4 percent in 1969 unemployment in the United States rose to 10.8 percent in 1982. American factories operated at two-thirds their capacity. Unemployment once more became the bane of industrial capitalism.

The economic troubles were somewhat cushioned for the unemployed in industrial countries. Labor unions were still active, although declining in membership and influence, and welfare benefits were more advanced than they had been in the 1930s. Workers in Essen, Turin, Liverpool, or Detroit could count on severance pay, trade union benefits, and government unemployment compensation far beyond the welfare payments and dole of earlier generations. These benefits reduced human suffering and also limited the decline in consumer purchasing power. The recession, however, aggravated the problem of “structural unemployment.” Because of automation, high technology, and the dwindling importance of older, less-efficient sectors (such as coal mining, shipbuilding, and other so-called smokestack industries), many workers would never return to their old jobs or use their old skills again.

The combination of stagnation and inflation (dubbed “stagflation” by journalists) created unprecedented problems for governments. Keynesian theory, which had gained a wide following after 1945, called for government spending and deficit financing in slow times to buoy demand and keep employment stable. With inflation rampant, such measures became questionable. The dilemma centered on whether curbing inflation or reducing unemployment should claim the highest priority. Efforts to fight inflation by tight money and high interest rates would discourage investment, aggravate the business slowdown, and swell the ranks of the unemployed. Government spending to prime the pump or reducing interest rates to facilitate private borrowing could feed inflation.

With the American economy troubled, the Western industrial countries looked to the Federal Republic of Germany and its powerful economy and trade surpluses to take the lead in expanding investment and production. Germany, however, mindful of the hyperinflation of the 1920s, set its highest priority on controlling inflation; it kept interest rates high and rejected expansionist policies. Other countries followed the same track. By the early 1980s inflation was brought under control in the United States and in western Europe, but in Europe unemployment continued at levels unheard of in the early postwar decades. The high unemployment put new pressures on government budgets, which had risen steadily in all the “welfare state” societies of the industrial world.

From 1950 to the mid-1970s the percentage of gross national product spent on social measures in the industrial countries had more than doubled, creating a pattern of rising taxes and government expenditures that came to be criticized as an obstacle to economic growth.

The established tenets of Keynesian economics were now challenged as never before. The British Conservative party leader Margaret Thatcher, who became prime minister in 1979, led the campaign against the welfare state and was soon joined by Ronald Reagan, the American Republican president from 1981 to 1989. Both leaders attacked the welfare state as costly, wasteful, paternalistic, and bureaucratic and blamed it for eroding individual initiative and responsibility. Nationalized industries, where they existed, also came under criticism.

Although conservative governments continued heavy expenditures for national defense, they curbed government spending on social measures. Meanwhile to stimulate production they offered numerous incentives to private enterprise, including tax reductions, deregulation, and restraints on unions that interfered with technological innovation. “Supply side” economics, as these ideas were labeled, emphasized increased production rather than the hitherto prevailing notion of increased consumer demand as most important for economic growth. The results were then expected to “trickle down” for everyone’s benefit, with a safety net in place for the truly disadvantaged.

The gradual return of prosperity, especially in the United States from about 1982 on, reinforced faith in the free-market economy, despite uneasiness about the continuing vicissitudes of the business cycle. Conservative economic theories and policies appeared to be confirmed by a worldwide movement toward market economies and away from centralized planning, which in its rigidly Marxist form had manifestly failed in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe. Defenders of the welfare state, however, continued to stress the importance of supplementing market economies with direct action by governments to meet individual and social needs. The welfare, or interventionist, state still served important social needs and seemed destined to survive, even if in modified form. A new generation of liberal, labor, and socialist leaders came to preach the virtues of a “new middle way” that leaned heavily on market economies as the key to economic growth but without surrendering the prerogatives of government in confronting the social and economic problems of modern societies.

Economic and Political Change in Western Europe

Britain was especially hard hit by the recession of the 1970s. Of all the industrial nations, it suffered the highest rate of inflation. Unemployment climbed, and the pound dropped to a new low in global financial markets. The trade unions refused to accept the sacrifices that even their own Labour party believed necessary to revive the economy, and disruptive strikes in coal and transportation exasperated much of the country. Radical factions in the Labour party pressed for increased nationalization of industry and for nonalignment in the Cold War. Alienated by the economic confusion and collapse of moral authority, which they blamed on Labour governments that had been in power since 1974, the voters in 1979 turned to the Conservatives.

Margaret Thatcher, the first woman prime minister in any major Western country, headed a Conservative government resolved to change matters. She immediately and decisively cut government expenditures, reduced imports, and resisted trade union wage demands. The focus shifted to investment, productivity, and economic growth. Inflation was curbed, but unemployment rose. The Thatcher government in its early years seemed headed for political trouble, but in 1982 Thatcher stirred old patriotic and imperial memories by dispatching a small armada 8,000 miles to the coast of South America, thwarting the attempted takeover of the Falkland (or Malvina) Islands by Argentina. The Conservatives won a sweeping parliamentary majority the following year.

For a time in the 1980s the Thatcher policies were successful. The government curtailed the power of the unions, returned over one-third of the nationalized industries to private enterprise, and made credit more readily available for business and for home buyers. Britain could soon point to the highest economic growth rate of all the European countries, rising productivity, low inflation, a stronger pound, a higher standard of living for most people, widened home ownership, and buoyant self-confidence. Unemployment, however, remained high; fiscal retrenchment hurt education, especially the universities; and pockets of deep depression persisted, especially in the north of England and in Scotland and Wales where traditional industries such as coal mining and shipbuilding faced difficulties competing in the new global economy. The south and southeast enjoyed a bustling prosperity, especially in the high-technology industries around London and Cambridge. Meanwhile London reinforced its position as a world financial center, and the United Kingdom became once again a leading creditor nation. Decades of economic decline and demoralization seemed to have been reversed. The opposition was disunited and in disarray. In the elections of 1987, Labour’s popular vote dropped to its lowest point in decades, and union membership declined.

But when economic growth slowed after the stimulus of privatization and deregulation wore off, Thatcher introduced a number of fiscal measures that led to her fall in 1990. Her successor as prime minister, John Major, had to cope with a new recession that set in after 1990, a weakened pound, and unemployment. Labour, meanwhile, under new leadership that abandoned older ideas of class struggle and attracted a broad range of middle-class support, continued to challenge the Conservatives, arguing that the Thatcher era had favored the rich and fostered a less equitable society. Finally, under the moderate “New Labour” leadership of Tony Blair, the Labour party won the parliamentary elections in 1997 and regained control of the government for the first time since 1979. Blair and the increasingly moderate Labour party would remain in power on into the opening decade of the twenty-first century, winning a third consecutive electoral victory in 2005.

In France, politics in the 1980s veered toward the Left. An austerity program adopted in the 1970s by the conservative parties to combat inflation was unpopular, and the government’s aloofness, elitism, and seeming unconcern with social issues under de Gaulle’s successors helped the Socialist-led opposition grow in strength. In 1981 François Mitterrand achieved the goal he had set for himself and the Socialist party. He himself had had a varied career, some aspects of which were unknown until the last years of his life, including his association with right-wing causes in the early 1930s and his wartime service to the Vichy government before joining the Resistance movement. He was known as a moderate Socialist, whose socialism owed more to liberal idealism than to Marxism.

A consummate politician, he revitalized the Socialist party and reached out to many who chafed at the social insensitivities of the Gaullists and Conservatives. “Changer la vie”—change life for everyone—was his campaign slogan. Not only did he win the presidency, but his Socialist party triumphantly gained an absolute majority in the National Assembly.

Labor reforms were immediately introduced. The workweek was reduced from 40 to 39 hours and a fifth week of annual paid vacation was added. Following up on the nationalizations of 1945, Mitterrand nationalized the remaining large banks as well as several leading industrial corporations. One of the few European leaders still faithful to Keynesian precepts in the 1980s, he expected government pump priming and labor reforms to raise purchasing power, stimulate the economy, and thus absorb the costs of the expanded welfare state. But increased labor costs reduced French competitiveness abroad, and private investment also dried up. The immediate consequences were slow economic growth, trade deficits, inflation, unemployment, and a weakening franc. Within two years Mitterrand abruptly changed course. He halted further nationalization and other reforms, insisted on retrenchment and austerity to cope with inflation, and placed a strong emphasis on modernization. Cutting off subsidies to decaying industries, he shifted government support to high technology. The new policies encouraged economic growth but contributed little to reducing unemployment. His Socialist followers were disenchanted and frustrated. Others in the country, however, were relieved to see him concentrate on strengthening the nation’s economy rather than on sectarian politics.

Renewed economic problems, however, cost the Socialist party popular support. It lost its parliamentary majority in 1986 and Mitterrand was forced to govern with a Conservative prime minister. The term “cohabitation” entered the political language to signify a popularly elected president of one party governing with a prime minister who represented the opposing parliamentary majority. It was a precedent that de Gaulle never foresaw. But as an established practice that was repeated over the years to come, it became a legacy of Mitterrand that demonstrated the resiliency of the Fifth Republic. In the Gaullist tradition, however, the president continued to determine defense and foreign policy.

When in 1988 Mitterrand was reelected president, the Socialists regained a small plurality in the National Assembly. But unemployment, scandals involving Socialist ministers, and inroads by environmental and other groups led to a socialist rout in 1993 and the return of a large conservative majority. Cohabitation resumed under the conservative Gaullist Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, who was then elected to the presidency in the elections of 1995 and 2002, and the seesaw pattern of French politics continued in his administration. While the French economy strengthened impressively in the 1990s, unemployment remained a persistent problem, especially for young people. One measure, adopted by the Socialist prime minister, Lionel Jospin, reduced the workweek from 39 to 35 hours to create new jobs, but met with strong opposition from most employers. During these years women played a much larger role in French government and public institutions than ever before, occupying key ministries and high-level posts in business and professional life. A new law, to be implemented in stages, provided that women were to be candidates in elections for representative bodies in equal numbers with men. A few women writers and scholars were even admitted to the French Academy, a male bastion since 1635.

Socialists and Social Democrats holding office in western Europe in these years championed modernization, market economies, and economic growth as the path to the good society; and their policies won broad support. Moderation and pragmatism succeeded in overshadowing if not entirely replacing older ideologies. Helmut Schmidt, the Social Democratic chancellor in West Germany from 1974 to 1982, was one leading exemplar. In Italy, Bettino Craxi and a Socialist coalition in 1983 ended the long tenure of the Christian Democrats, who had formed 40 consecutive cabinets since 1945. The Italian Socialists governed for an unprecedented four years but were barely distinguishable in policies and practices from the long-entrenched Christian Democratic establishment. In Spain the popular Socialist party leader, Felipe Gonzalez, in 1982 headed the first Left government since the Spanish Civil War of the 1930s and governed on into the mid-1990s. In Portugal, after the revolutionary turbulence of 1974, a Socialist and a Social Democratic party competed with each other on moderate platforms.

In West Germany Helmut Schmidt’s Social Democratic government moved to control inflation through policies of retrenchment and fiscal conservatism, but the industrial slowdown of the late 1970s brought unemployment to a country which for years had known only labor scarcity. Even after recovery, unemployment persisted at about eight percent. The doors once open to guest workers began to close; bonuses were offered to those who would return home; activist reactionary groups (as in Britain, France, and Austria) alarmingly exploited antiimmigrant and antiforeign sentiment. In 1982 the Christian Democrats were returned to office with Helmut Kohl as chancellor, who would remain in office for the next 16 years. Economic growth resumed, although at more modest rates, and the mark maintained itself as one of the world’s strongest currencies. The German Federal Republic remained the most productive nation in western Europe, accounting for a third of the combined output of the European Community. But heavy labor costs, resulting from high wages and generous social benefits, burdened the economy and reduced its competitiveness in world markets. Meanwhile the prospects in the 1980s for reunification of the two Germanys still seemed remote—Germany would apparently remain “one nation and two states,” in Willy Brandt’s phrase.

The American Economy

The United States recovered from the post-1974 recession sooner and more completely than the Europeans. The American economy suffered business slowdowns and serious inflation from 1974 to 1982; but once inflation was brought under control, the economy began to grow in the 1980s. Deregulation of industry, encouraged under the Reagan and George H. W. Bush presidencies, and corporate streamlining or restructuring (often called downsizing) produced greater profits and stimulated economic growth, as did the beginnings of the computer revolution. Continuing interventions by the Federal Reserve Board, which raised or lowered interest rates, helped to protect against inflation. The stock market began to rise, as did real estate values. In the 1980s unemployment dropped below 6 percent, and the labor force grew at a time when unemployment was still a persistent problem in Europe, though many of the newly employed in the United States were entering lower-paying service industries. There were setbacks, including a dramatic but temporary fall in stock prices in 1987 and a failure of savings and loans banks, which had overextended their credit. A more general economic slowdown again set in after 1989, and unemployment rose to 7.8 percent. Campaigning on the poor performance of the economy, the Democratic candidate Bill Clinton was able to defeat President Bush in the election of 1992. At the time few recognized that by the spring of 1991 the economy was already embarking on an extraordinary expansion that would continue throughout the decade and into the opening of the new century.

There were still many areas of economic concern in the 1980s. The trading strength of the United States accentuated some of its economic problems. The oil crisis of the 1970s had ultimately reinforced the dollar (oil profits were invested in dollars), and the dollar's value rose steadily in the early 1980s, raising the cost of American goods in global markets. American exports also faced strong competition from western Europe and Japan, and from the newly industrialized small states in Asia, where labor costs were low and newer highly mechanized plants provided a competitive edge. The strong dollar made it difficult for the United States to sell its products and aggravated its already heavy trade deficit. The United States therefore sought to bring down the high value of the dollar by 1985. Over the next three years the dollar lost almost 50 percent of its value in relation to foreign currencies, declining to its lowest level since 1945 and creating a new challenge for the American economy. Japanese, West Europeans, Canadians, Arabs, and others seized the opportunity to buy into American corporations, banks, brokerage houses, and real estate. By the late 1980s foreign holdings of American assets totaled $1 trillion.

Meanwhile the Japanese economy reached such giant dimensions that corporations like the Fujita Bank and the Toyota Corporation were valued at five to ten times the market value of the largest American companies. The Nomura Securities Corporation of Tokyo became at the time the largest brokerage firm in the world. Not one of the world’s ten largest hanks in the 1980s was American. From 1985 on, for the first time since 1914, the United States was a debtor nation. Foreign interests owned more assets in the United States than Americans owned abroad, which meant a steady outflow of interest, dividends, and rents. Even when American exports expanded, imports continued to grow and the trade balance remained unfavorable. The annual budget deficit mounted and the national debt soared from less than $1 trillion in 1981 to well over $4 trillion by 1990. Foreign capital financed the American debt and profited from the interest on American bonds.

Concern mounted, even as the American economy was recovering, over the weakness in exports, the balance-of-payments deficits, the burden of defense expenditures, the growing national debt, the large annual budget deficits, and the foreign acquisition of American assets. Analysts pointed to inadequate American savings and investment, a relative slowdown in productivity gains since the 1960s, a lag in industrial research and development, and shortcomings in American education for an increasingly competitive world. The American economy was still the largest in the world; in the early 1990s its gross domestic product exceeded $5 trillion, far ahead of Japan and Germany. But it had shown a relative decline in growth in relation to the other major industrial nations. Deep pockets of poverty and racial tensions persisted within the country. It was debated at the time whether the United States, still the premier political, economic, and military power, might lose its primacy because of economic weaknesses—as Spain, the Netherlands, France, and Britain had in earlier centuries.

The prospects that opened up in the late 1980s of winding down the Cold War and of a measure of relief from the burden of arms expenditures brought some reassurances. Meanwhile, the Japanese economy, which had become increasingly based on an overinflated stock market and real estate values, entered in 1989 on a long period of difficulties that persisted throughout and beyond the following decade. Before long, American productivity, economic growth, technological innovation, and international competitiveness in the 1990s made most of the earlier jeremiads seem hollow or short-sighted.

The Financial World

The world’s largest stock exchanges and financial markets were centered in New York City. Deregulation in the 1980s brought with it a sharp increase in financial acquisitions and mergers. New forms of trading in options and futures and widening participation by small investors contributed to the stock market’s growth and volatility. Once again, as in the 1920s, the lines between speculation and investment became blurred. In October 1987, a tremor ran through the United States and world markets when stocks on the New York Stock Exchange in one day lost close to one-fourth then-value, conjuring up memories of the October 1929 crash and the ensuing Great Depression. But the market recovered, and in the following decade it went on to reach new heights—and to experience also new periods of extreme volatility. The 1987 episode clearly demonstrated the interdependence of the world’s financial markets. Reverberations of the 1987 shock in New York were felt instantly in London, Frankfurt, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taipei, Sydney, and elsewhere. The financial markets, like the currency markets, were decentralized but were more interwoven than ever before. With new systems of telecommunications and other advanced computer technology, a single financial market operated around the world and around the clock.

The sense of mutual interdependence in the global economy came to be widely shared. The United States, western Europe, and Japan recognized that the prosperity of each depended on the smooth functioning of the world economy. The heads of state of the seven largest industrial powers with market economies (the “Group of Seven”—the United States, Britain, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Canada, and Japan) met from the 1970s on in annual economic summits to consult on the state of the economy. The leading central banks made efforts to stabilize interest and exchange rates. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) brought together the 24 leading industrial nations of the world, and GATT continued its “rounds” of negotiations to reduce tariffs. The integration of the Soviet Union and eastern Europe into the global economy, initiated in the 1970s in the first period of détente, and the rapid political changes taking place there after the late 1980s provided further opportunities for international cooperation. The developing nations, however, remained somewhat on the economic periphery, their heavy debt and slow economic growth intensifying their dependence on the industrial world. They remained critical of a globalization that seemed to ignore or pay inadequate attention to their needs.

The Enlarged European Community: Problems and Opportunities

After de Gaulle passed from the political scene in 1969, the way had opened for enlarging the six-nation European Community (EC). In 1973 Britain, Denmark, and Ireland were admitted; the 6 became 9. In the next decade, with the admission of Greece in 1981 and Spain and Portugal in 1986, the 9 became 12. In 1995, with the admission of Austria, Finland, and Sweden, the numbers grew to 15. The largest expansion made possible by momentous changes in Eastern Europe after 1989 and by the collapse of Soviet communism, would take place at the beginning of the twenty-first century, in 2004, when ten more nations from eastern and southern Europe (from Estonia to Malta) joined what had come to be known as the European Union.[1]

[1]By 2005 the European Union member states were Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. There was also a growing debate over the question of whether Turkey should become the next member of the EU.

Enlargement brought new difficulties, aggravated by the economic slowdown of the 1970s and then by the wage differentials between richer and poorer countries. A food importer, Britain objected to the “common agricultural policy” agreed upon in 1968, whereby countries such as France and Italy received large subsidies for their farmers, whose products were withheld from the open market and stored at great expense to keep prices artificially high. The admission of the less industrially advanced southern Mediterranean states in the 1980s (and of eastern nations in the early twenty-first century) introduced serious regional differences. Despite the original promise and accomplishments of the Community as a whole, the free trading area remained far from complete. Countries still placed quotas on agricultural imports; France kept out Italian wines. Burdensome administrative regulations at the borders persisted.

Except for a limited circle of Europeanists, the enthusiasm for close political integration seemed to have dimmed. With enlargement and greater diversity, the Community became even more intergovernmental and less supranational. Britain was always reluctant to support additional supranational authority for the Community. In periods of economic slowdown and monetary instability the national governments themselves had to cope with the problems. In 1973 the heads of government leaders began meeting as a council on a regular basis, the presidency rotating among the member states. The first elections to the European Parliament in 1979 were more symbolic than substantial, and the Parliament’s role as a legislature failed to grow significantly. While the more ambitious dream of a United States of Europe went unrealized, the Community, for all its problems, remained an important institution, poised for further growth.

Toward a "Single Europe": the European Union

Even during the prosperous 1960s, the European economy did not maintain its growth in all areas. But in the 1970s the world itself was entering a new phase of industrialism, a “third industrial revolution,” marked by the introduction of automation, computers, and other forms of advanced technology. Progress would no longer be measured in coal and steel or in ships and textiles but in nuclear reactors, microelectronics, telecommunications, computers, robotics, and space technology. In the “postindustrial” age data processing, information storage and retrieval, and more and more sophisticated communications capabilities were the keys to competitive success. In 1977 the first personal computer was produced for what would become a mass market, with rapid improvements to follow in speed and capacity. More workers were employed in the service sector than in the older basic industries, and the service economy was growing faster than either agriculture or industry. It was widely noted that the global economy was eroding the economic and political autonomy of the nation-state. Using new technologies, the multinational corporations of the industrial world invested capital and set up shop across the globe, independent of all national boundaries.

In the new forms of technology, the Europeans found themselves for a time outdistanced by the Americans and the Japanese. American multinational corporations controlled most of the high-technology industries in Europe—before the Japanese arrived to compete. Trade competition from Japan and the rapidly developing industrial countries of the Pacific Rim grew. The post-1974 recession made it difficult for the Europeans to promote research and development. Western Europe lagged behind other parts of the world in recovering economically after 1974 or in coping with unemployment.

The European Community set about to reinvigorate itself in the 1980s. Although internal tariffs had disappeared, nontariff obstacles still impeded the flow of trade. Nationally dictated, and therefore varying, standards of production and quality prevailed. In 1987, by the “Single European Act” the 12 member-nations agreed to establish common production standards, remove impediments to the flow of capital, seek uniform tax rates, recognize each other’s professional and commercial licensing, and honor a common charter of labor rights. They would create an integrated “single Europe,” a “Europe without borders.” A unified European currency and central banking system were projected for the end of the 1990s, and even a common defense and foreign policy were envisaged for the future. These arrangements were confirmed in a Treaty of European Union signed at Maastricht in the Netherlands at the close of 1991, and ratified after protracted debate by the parliaments or electorates of the member states by the end of 1992. Opponents in several countries raised objections to the loss of national control in so many areas, but the treaty was adopted. The European Community became the European Union (EU). The way was open to closer integration.

The European Union represented a domestic market of 345 million people (one-third larger than that of the United States) and by the early 1990s was the largest trading bloc in the global economy, accounting for 40 percent of all international trade. With the new steps toward integration and the later expansion of EU membership, Europeans hoped to enlarge investment, develop high technology, stimulate productivity, end the lagging rate of economic growth, and reduce an unemployment rate that was still distressingly high. For the world as a whole, a return to protectionism was always a lurking danger. Advocates of tariffs on imported goods could be found in most industrial nations, and the industrial nations might divide into large regional trading blocs. New competitive barriers could interfere with the free trade that had contributed so much to post-1945 prosperity.

123. THE COLD WAR REKINDLED

We must go back in time to pick up the flow of international affairs. In the summer of 1974 President Nixon resigned his office to avoid impeachment over his role in the Watergate scandal. His vice president, Gerald Ford, succeeded him. But in the next election the Democratic candidate Jimmy Carter won and took office in 1977. President Carter sought to infuse American foreign policy with moral idealism. Human rights, he declared, must be “the soul of our foreign policy.” Detente with the Soviet Union was now more closely linked than before to respect for human rights; economic aid would be forthcoming only if the Soviets permitted freedom to dissenters, the right of emigration for Soviet Jews and others, and an end to the coercion of Poland. The Soviets did not take kindly to these public pressures. Both sides meanwhile reinforced their military and nuclear strength.

On the other hand both countries continued strategic arms talks and after tortuous negotiations signed a second strategic arms treaty in January 1979. They agreed to parity in strategic, or long-range, nuclear missiles. Although the number of powerful missiles remained high and nothing prevented the development of new sophisticated weapons, the agreement might have been an important breakthrough in arms control. But before it could be ratified by the Senate, the Soviet Union moved troops into the neighboring state of Afghanistan to bolster a weak pro-Soviet leftist regime. It was the first Soviet military intervention of that kind outside eastern Europe.

Carter denounced the invasion as a new phase of expansion by the Soviets threatening the entire Middle East—“a stepping stone in their possible control over much of the world’s oil supplies.” He warned that an attempt by any outside force to gain control of that region would be regarded as “an assault on the vital interests of the United States” and would be repulsed “by any means necessary, including military force.” He withdrew the arms treaty from the Senate, embargoed sales of grain and high technology to the Soviets, took measures to increase the military budget, and set up procedures at home for a renewal of the draft.

The invasion of Afghanistan, Carter informed the U.S.S.R., was the most serious threat to world peace since 1945. The European allies were not as convinced. Some argued that the Afghanistan episode was a regional matter, that the Soviet Union was acting to prevent instability on its borders, and that detente should continue. Unwilling to disturb commercial relations with the Soviets and eastern Europe, they refused to support the economic embargo which, among other consequences, would have interfered with the completion of a Soviet natural gas pipeline to western Europe. As it developed, Afghanistan turned out to be the U.S.S-R.’s Vietnam. Some 100,000 troops fought for over 8 1/2 years before withdrawing ignominiously in 1989. Like the Americans in Vietnam, the Soviets were unable to use their overwhelming military power to defeat the Muslim guerrillas who, armed with American weapons and supported by Pakistan, fought stubbornly from their Afghan mountain strongholds.

At the very time of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the United States had become preoccupied with the Iran hostage crisis, the seizing of American hostages by Iranian revolutionary militants in Tehran. It was a heavy blow to American prestige, compounded by the failure of an ill-fated rescue attempt. To add to Carter’s humiliation, the American hostages were freed on the day that his Republican successor, Ronald Reagan, took office in January 1981.

The Reagan Years: From Revived Cold War to New Détente

There was no doubt of the new president’s commitment to a hard line in the Cold War. The Soviet Union, Reagan asserted in 1983, represented “the focus of evil in the modern world.” It was “an evil empire” with “dark purposes.” Despite the strain on its economy, the Soviet Union during the 1970s had built up its military strength, modernized its conventional fighting forces, created a powerful navy, and achieved nuclear parity. With congressional support Reagan substantially increased defense appropriations, sponsored the largest peacetime military spending in the nation’s history, and took a confrontational stand against communism everywhere. He stepped up arras shipments to the Muslim guerrillas in Afghanistan and sent aid to Pakistan, which was backing the Afghan rebels. Against the Communist government in Poland he applied economic sanctions when, under pressure from the Soviets, it imposed martial law in 1981 to suppress the Solidarity trade union movement. He reinforced the embargo on the sale of high technology to the Soviets and to eastern Europe, but the embargo on grain sales was dropped because of opposition from American farmers.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1957-1995

        Soviet Union launches first satellite into outer space
1961    Soviet Union constructs the Berlin wall to stop exodus from East Germany
1962    United States compels the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba
1965    United States begins more intensive military buildup and large-scale bombing in Vietnam
1968    Soviet troops enter Czechoslovakia to crush reform movement in Prague 1972 United States withdraws its last troops from Vietnam
1974    High oil prices and inflation contribute to global economic recession
1975    Communist forces in Vietnam take control of the country; Saigon becomes Ho Chi Minh City
1978    Deng Xiaoping, successor to Mao, launches sweeping economic reforms in China
1979    Margaret Thatcher becomes prime minister in England
1979    Soviet Union invades Afghanistan to protect left-wing regime
1980    Ronald Reagan is elected president of the United States
1981    Francois Mitterrand is elected president of France
1982    Helmut Kohl becomes chancellor of West Germany
1989    Democracy movement is suppressed in China
1992    Treaty of Maastricht establishes the European Union
1995    European Union membership expands to include 15 nations; in 2004 it expands to 25 nations

In Central America and the Caribbean, Reagan accused the Soviets of using Castro’s Cuba and the leftist Sandinista regime in Nicaragua as proxies to spread communism in the Western Hemisphere. The United States armed anti-Communist opponents of the regime in Nicaragua and reinforced dictatorial anti-Communist regimes in neighboring states and other parts of Latin America. In 1983 American forces invaded the small Caribbean island of Grenada to overthrow a leftist government that was permitting the Cubans to build an airport of potential military use.

Even more than his predecessors, Reagan and his foreign policy advisers supported repressive authoritarian regimes so long as they were anti-Communist, on the theory that one day such regimes might be liberalized; Communist governments, they believed, transformed their societies irreversibly. Critics, on the other hand, argued that revolutionary movements in Latin America and elsewhere sprang not from the Cold War but from protests against systems of privilege and exploitation; they opposed military solutions and support to repressive regimes as inappropriate responses.

In Libya, the administration demonstrated the American willingness to take unilateral military action. American planes bombed military installations in retaliation for what it was convinced were Libyan-sponsored terrorist activities. In Lebanon, in the throes of civil war, the United States organized a multinational peacekeeping force in 1982. The American fleet landed marines, and Islamist terrorists retaliated by blowing up the American embassy and the American and French command centers, killing hundreds of American marines and French soldiers. The peacekeeping force withdrew.

In the war between Iran and Iraq that broke out in 1980, when attacks on tankers in the Persian Gulf threatened the flow of oil from the Arab Gulf states, the United States escorted a selected number of tankers under the protection of the American flag. The United States was intent on asserting American leadership in world affairs and on keeping the Soviets, insofar as possible, out of the Middle East.

Nuclear Arms Control

No nuclear weapons were used in any conflict in the years after 1945, yet over every crisis hung the ultimate threat of a nuclear clash. We have seen how the earliest negotiations on nuclear disarmament, at a time when the United States alone possessed the atomic bomb, were broken off in 1947; how in 1949 the Soviets successfully tested their first atomic bomb, ending the American monopoly; and how the United States in 1952 and the Soviet Union shortly thereafter developed the hydrogen or thermonuclear bomb, which by its chain reaction had vastly more destructive capacity than the mere 20,000 tons of TNT of the Hiroshima bomb. By the 1960s both superpowers were building strategic long-range missiles, that is, intercontinental ballistic missiles, capable of delivering their nuclear warheads accurately and swiftly to targets in each other’s homeland. They could be launched from land (from either stationary or mobile sites), from sea (from ships or submarines), or from bombers in the air. Guided missiles were the key strategic weapons of the modern age. Because of their immense destructive power, the nuclear weapons could not be used without unleashing unspeakable damage; they were different and distinct, it was agreed, from conventional weapons. The arms experts insisted that nuclear arms were built not for use but for deterrence.

Because nuclear testing threatened to poison the earth’s atmosphere, and perhaps even damage the genetic endowment of present and future generations, controls were imperative. In 1963, despite Cold War tensions, the United States and the U.S.S.R. initiated a partial test-ban treaty, which banned testing in the atmosphere and permitted only underground testing. Concern over the spread of nuclear weapons prompted the two superpowers to propose a nonproliferation treaty, which was endorsed by the UN General Assembly in 1968 and eventually signed by over 130 states. It lacked binding force, however, and was ignored by those countries bent on developing nuclear power.

The United States had led the way in the development of nuclear weapons, with Britain also participating from the beginning. The Soviet Union had then followed; France in 1960 became a fourth nuclear power. The People’s Republic of China in 1964 became a fifth; India in 1974, a sixth. By the early twenty-first century the list of countries that had achieved a nuclear capacity included Israel, Pakistan, and perhaps North Korea; and others such as Iran were suspected of seeking to develop nuclear weapons.

The fear that states that had demonstrated a flagrant disregard for international law or that terrorist organizations might come to possess nuclear materials prompted even greater concerns.

So long as the peaceful use of nuclear energy was encouraged, it was difficult to prevent proliferation. Nations purchasing nuclear power plants from industrial countries, ostensibly for peaceful purposes, could reprocess the plutonium from the spent fuel and build nuclear bombs, as India did. The search for alternative energy sources to replace oil stimulated many nations to build nuclear power plants that could be transformed for nonpeaceful purposes. Accidents at nuclear power plants, the most notorious of which were at Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania, in 1979 and, even more serious, at Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1986, did not deter the building of nuclear power plants but underscored the need for safer construction. From Chernobyl radioactive materials in the atmosphere traveled as far as western Europe.

From the 1960s on debate continued in the United States about the missile gap, about the comparative numbers of the American and Soviet missile systems deployed on land and sea and in the air, and about the vulnerability of the American land-based missile systems. Following the Soviet missile buildup after the Cuban crisis of 1962, the two superpowers had achieved a rough parity by the 1970s. Although both recognized superiority as an elusive goal, nothing restrained them from adding more and more strategic arms. Strategists on each side supported the buildup. Using advanced computer programs, they calculated the potential casualties in a nuclear exchange between the superpowers in millions of deaths (or “megadeaths”) and evaluated the effects of deterrents and counterdeterrents and of “first strikes” and “counterstrikes” on each nation’s ability to wage and survive nuclear war. The balance of power was spoken of as a “balance of terror”; experts referred to “mutually assured destruction” (the acronym for which, ironically, was MAD). Deterrence was the accepted formula.

Each side amassed huge stockpiles of arms, capable of destroying each other many times over, in what was described as “overkill.” The two superpowers were also under continuing pressure to modernize their systems competitively—at exorbitant cost. When the Soviets developed defense systems, that is, antiballistic missiles, which undermined deterrence, the American response was to build its own defense systems and more powerful offensive weapons— such as the MIRV (a “multiple independently targeted reentry vehicle”), a delivery system carrying up to ten nuclear warheads, each independently guided to separate targets, each warhead many times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb. The Russians developed their own multi warhead systems—all leading to an even higher level of armaments and greater uncertainty. Both sides had satellite reconnaissance systems, but for a time neither could determine the number of warheads on the other side and hence know with accuracy the other’s capability. After the first SALT (or strategic arms limitation) treaty, signed in 1972, each side developed new weapons outside the classes that were limited. The United States developed cruise missiles, designed to fly low to the ground and hence protected from defense systems; the Soviets, supersonic bombers. A second arms treaty, signed in 1979 but not ratified until later, produced tentative agreement on equality in the total number of strategic long-range weapons, but protracted discussions continued.

At the close of the 1980s each superpower possessed about 25,000 nuclear weapons, of which about 12,000 on each side were strategic, that is, long-range, or intercontinental. Together the two arsenals exceeded 500,000 megatons (millions of tons) of explosive power, dwarfing the total explosive power used in all previous wars. If only a small number of these nuclear arms reached their targets, the two countries could destroy each other’s major cities and countryside and kill millions in the attack and in the radioactive after-effects, which would spread to neighboring areas. In the “nuclear winter” that might follow, human survival itself was at risk. There was always the dread possibility of accident, miscalculation, or failure of communication. So deliberately suspended over the human race was the nuclear sword of Damocles that a direct communication link, or “hot line,” was installed between the Kremlin and the White House in 1963, soon after the Cuban missile crisis; and in the following decades it was modernized and improved. It was designed to prevent the accidental outbreak of a nuclear war because of political misunderstanding, human error, or mechanical slipup; direct communication between the chieftains was necessary in the nuclear age. No more than a 20-minute warning might be available.

The debate over security in the Cold War went beyond that of the defense strategists. Many pointed to the danger, the paradox, and even the immorality of building vast nuclear arsenals to prevent nuclear war; some (in the West) even urged unilateral disarmament. Others argued that without a high level of armaments a nation could be subject to nuclear blackmail. They maintained that the nuclear balance between the two opposing camps and the principle of deterrence had protected the peace. Everyone, to be sure, affirmed the need to reduce the political tensions and insecurity that fed the arms competition. Yet in the rekindled Cold War tensions of the early 1980s there seemed to be no solution to the impasse. Reluctantly, the world reconciled itself to the existing “balance of terror,” except for piecemeal negotiations on arms limitations. It was only the unanticipated changes in the Soviet Union, its breakup, and the ending of the Cold War that brought unprecedented opportunities for nuclear arms reduction. But the altered situation would raise different dangers, leave proliferation a continuing threat, and still require constant reassessments of global safety.

124. CHINA AFTER MAO

After Mao died in 1976, moderates and radicals competed for leadership. Mao’s widow Jiang Qing, one of the firebrands of the Cultural Revolution, together with a small group of Maoist radicals, sought to win control and purge the moderates, but the attempt failed and she and her three associates—the so-called “gang of four”—were arrested and imprisoned. From behind the scenes Deng Xiaoping, the leader of the moderates, emerged by 1977 to become the most powerful figure in the country. Deng was a veteran party leader who had fallen out of favor with Mao in 1956-1957, was purged and humiliated in 1967 during the Cultural Revolution for having taken the “capitalist road,” and purged for a third time in 1976 by the Maoist radicals. To counteract the Maoist cult of personality Deng over the years declined to accept the leading post in either government or party and instead placed his prot6g6s in top positions, but everyone knew who was in command.

Deng's Reforms

By late 1978 Deng won the party over to a sweeping reform program designed to curb the radical and utopian phases of the revolution, deemphasize Marxist ideology and class struggle, and focus on economic growth and modernization. Deng proposed to transform the central economic planning, nationalized industry, and collectivized agriculture inherited from Mao—and indirectly from the Soviet Union. Without abandoning socialism as the eventual goal, he sanctioned numerous capitalist practices; he encouraged private enterprise, production for profit, and a competitive marketplace, at first in limited areas of the country and then more extensively. For state-owned industries he demanded profitability and accountability. The new system would be “a marriage,” he said, “between a planned and a market economy.” Dismantling the collectivized farms and communes, which had proved disastrous for agriculture, he allowed cultivation of the land by individual farmers and their families. He opened the country to foreign investment and welcomed Western science, technology, and management techniques. Although heavy industry was not neglected, Deng placed a new emphasis on consumer goods; factories that once manufactured military hardware began to produce refrigerators, washing machines, bicycles, and motorcycles.

Deng’s reforms transformed Chinese society. Their most striking success was in the countryside, where farmers sold a significant portion of their product on the open market. Within a decade output doubled; more food became available for the cities, and even for export. In other parts of the economy retail outlets, repair shops, and other small businesses were in private hands. Special economic enclaves were established along the southern coast to encourage foreign enterprise and investment, much of it from Hong Kong. Foreign capital flowed in; a stock exchange was introduced. Gross domestic product, which had never risen by more than 2 or 3 percent annually under Mao, grew at an-average 9 percent annually in the 1980s and then at even higher rates. By the calculations of some international agencies China’s economic output was the third largest in the world. Many of the new entrepreneurs (and some farmers) became wealthy. The big cities took on aspects of a consumer society. Temporary joblessness was tempered by a state network of social services—an “iron rice bowl.” The country enjoyed an unprecedented rise in living standards. The People’s Liberation Army was reduced in size, but was modernized and made more professional, and the government bureaucracy was trimmed down. State-owned industries still accounted for a major share of production, but the growing private sector, flourishing in the coastal regions, represented the most vigorous part of the economy.

Even if China remained a one-party state, a “people’s democratic dictatorship” in one of the official phrases, and individual human rights (especially freedom of religion) were frequently violated, a more open and relaxed cultural and intellectual atmosphere prevailed. People tuned in on radio and television programs from the outside world. Students traveled and studied abroad. Many Western books were translated into Chinese. At no time since the Communist triumph in 1949 were the people so free to absorb ideas from the outside world. Foreign tourists visited in large numbers to see the new China. What earlier patriots and reformers like Sun Yat-sen had dreamed of, and Mao had failed to achieve because of his revolutionary excesses, Deng seemed to be accomplishing. Ideology was edged out by material advance, by the idea of a “rich and strong China.”

Deng wished to provide an orderly succession. He therefore dislodged veterans of the older generation (many, like him, survivors of the Long March of 1934-1935) who had clung to older Maoist ways, resisted Western political and economic ideas, and tried to block reform. The old guard retained a network of influence, and the country deferred to Deng as a central authority figure, but younger leaders began to emerge.

As the decade progressed, Deng’s reform program, for all its accomplishments, showed serious imperfections. The rapid economic growth fueled inflation (a 20 to 30 percent annual rate in the late 1980s). The emphasis on rising levels of consumption strained resources. Despite its avowals, the government did not liquidate its unprofitable state-owned industries, one-fifth of which operated at a loss. An erratic system of price controls encouraged a black market. Even agricultural production slowed down. The consumer society bred extravagance, conspicuous consumption, and wastefulness. Corruption, endemic in China, became widespread because government and party leaders were closely tied to business enterprises, government and private. Idealistic critics voiced dissatisfaction with the corruption and with growing inequities in a socialist society. In response to these cumulative problems Deng in 1988 called for retrenchment and a pause in further reform.

【此后存在大量删节】