Chapter 16

EUROPE'S WORLD SUPREMACY, 1871-1914

77. Imperialism: Its Nature and Causes

78. The Americas

79. The Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire

80. The Partition of Africa

81. Imperialism in Asia: The Dutch, the British, and the Russians

82. Imperialism in Asia: China and the West

83. The Russo-Japanese War and Its Consequences

The economic, political, and cultural institutions and ideas of modern European civilization, as described in the last two chapters, spread steadily across most of the world after about 1870. The large European nation-states, which were now equipped with the overwhelming new powers of science and industry, gained empires for themselves throughout the globe. The history of Europe—as of Asia, Africa, and the Americas— became more closely involved than ever before in the history of the world.

For a while the most active of the imperialist nation-states were located in Europe, and the 40 years preceding the First World War were the years of Europe’s world supremacy. With the rise of the United States the term “Western” came into use, signifying European in an expanded sense. The modernization of Japan made the term “Western” inappropriate in some ways, as did other later developments. By the mid-twentieth century it was customary to speak of “developed” parts of the world, in comparison with which others were seen as “less developed” or “developing.” There even came to be a “Third World,” with no specific geographic identity of its own, but which came to mean the developing countries in the later decades of the twentieth century. These terms represented efforts to deal with the same basic reality, namely, a bifurcation between modern and traditional societies, rich countries and poor ones, or between the powerful and the weak.

For the first time in human history, by 1900, it was possible to speak of a world civilization. Although retaining important differences in languages, culture, and social practices, all countries were drawn into a world economy and a world market. The attributes of political and economic modernity were much the same everywhere—modern science, modern weapons of warfare, machine industry, fast communications, industrial organization, efficient taxation and law enforcement, and modern public health, sanitation, and medicine.

But not all peoples participated in this global evolution on equal terms. It was the Europeans, or “Westerners,” who reaped the greatest rewards. Elsewhere, tribal societies and massive old civilizations alike began to come apart, reacting to the pressures of modern economic and social changes. Scientific ideas changed ways of thinking everywhere, as they had in Europe. In India, China, or Africa local industries often suffered, and many people found it harder than ever to subsist even at a low level. The building of railways in China, for example, threw boatmen, carters, and innkeepers out of work. In India, the hand spinners and weavers of cotton could not compete in their own villages with the machine-made products of Lancashire. In parts of Africa, tribal groups that had lived by owning herds of cattle, moving from place to place to obtain grazing lands, found white farmers or plantation or mine owners occupying their country and were often forced by the white man’s law to give up their migratory habits. Peoples of all races began to produce for export—rubber, raw cotton, jute, petroleum, tin, gold—and hence were exposed to the rise and fall of world prices. A depression tended to become a world depression, dragging all down alike.

Imperialism, or the colonialism of the late nineteenth century, may be briefly defined as the government of one people by another. As a specific form of political control, European imperialism proved to be transitory, weakening and disappearing in this form after the Second World War. But the economic and cultural aspects of the colonial systems continued to influence “postcolonial” societies after they regained their political independence. Imperialism and empire-building were a phase in the worldwide spread of the industrial and scientific civilization which had originated in Europe’s “inner zone.” That it was not the last phase became clear as the twentieth century unfolded. The subordinated peoples, forcibly introduced to the West by imperialism, came to sense a need for modernizing and industrializing their own countries and for the aid of Western science, technology, and capital; but they wished to get rid of imperialists, govern themselves, and control the conditions under which modernization and borrowing should take place. In opposition to European empires, subject peoples began to assert ideas learned from Europe—ideas of liberty and democracy, and of an anticapitalism that passed easily into socialism. Many such ideas were derived from the French and American revolutions, or from Marxism, or from the whole modern history of Europe itself; but these ideas were transformed or challenged as they entered into the political and cultural traditions of other civilizations.

The present chapter deals only with the imperialist phase of this global transformation. By one of the ironies of history, the imperialist rivalries of the European powers, while representing Europe’s world supremacy, also contributed to the disaster of the First World War, and so to the collapse of such supremacy as Europe had enjoyed.

77. IMPERIALISM: ITS NATURE AND CAUSES

European civilization had always shown a tendency to expand. In the Middle Ages Latin Christendom spread by conquest and conversion to include the whole area from Spain to Finland. Then came the age of overseas discoveries and the founding of colonial empires, whose struggles filled the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and whose most far-reaching consequence was the gradual “Europeanization” of the Americas. At the same time European culture spread among the upper classes of Russia. The defeat of Napoleon left only one of the old colonial empires standing in any strength, namely, the British. For 60 years after 1815 there were no significant colonial rivalries. In many circles there was an indifference to overseas empire. Under principles of free trade, it was thought unnecessary to exercise political influence in areas in which one did business. During these years, however, the French took control of Algeria, the British strengthened their Indian empire, the Dutch developed Java and the neighboring islands more intensively, and the Western powers “opened” Japan and began to penetrate China. But these developments did not lead to overt imperial conflicts among Europeans, and there was no systematic imperial program, doctrine, or “ism.”

Rather suddenly, about 1870 or 1880, colonial questions came again to the fore. In the short space of two decades, by 1900, the advanced industrial countries partitioned most of the earth among themselves. A world map by 1900 showed their possessions in some nine or ten colors.

The New Imperialism

The new imperialism differed both economically and politically from the colonialism of earlier times. The older empires had been maritime and mercantile. European traders in India, Java, or Canton had simply purchased the wares brought to them by local merchants as produced by local methods. They operated on a kind of cash-and-carry basis. European governments had had no territorial ambitions beyond the protection of way stations and trading centers. To these generalizations America, the Philippines, and Australia had been exceptions. They had neither native states which Europeans respected, nor native industries in which Europeans were interested. Europeans therefore developed territorial claims and invested capital and brought in their own methods of production and management, especially in the then booming sugar islands of the West Indies.

Under the new imperialism Europeans were by no means content simply to purchase what local merchants provided. They wanted goods of a kind or in a quantity that preindustrial handicraft methods could not supply. They moved into the so-called “backward” countries more thoroughly. They invested capital in them, setting up mines, plantations, docks, warehouses, factories, refineries, railroads, river steamships, and banks. They built offices, homes, hotels, clubs, and cool mountain resorts for European officials and visitors. Taking over the productive life of the country, they transformed large elements of the local population into the wage employees of foreign owners and so introduced the class problems of industrial Europe in a form accentuated by racial differences. Or they lent money to non-European rulers—the khedive of Egypt, the shah of Persia, the emperor of China— to enable them to hold up their tottering thrones or simply to live with more pleasure and magnificence than they could from their usual revenues. Europeans thus developed a huge financial stake in governments and economic enterprises outside the West.

To secure these investments, and for other reasons, in contrast to what had happened under the older colonialism, the Europeans now aspired to political and territorial domination. Some areas became outright colonies, directly governed by European states and their appointed government officials. Others became protectorates: here the native chief, sultan, bey, rajah, or prince was maintained and guaranteed against internal upheaval or external conquest.

A European “resident” or “commissioner” usually told him what to do. In other regions, as in China or Persia, where no single European state could make good its claims against the others, they arranged to divide the country into “spheres of influence,” each European power having advisory privileges and investment and trade opportunities within its own sphere. The sphere of influence was the vaguest of all forms of imperial control; supposedly, it left the country independent.

An enormous differential opened up, about 1875, between the power of European and non-European states. Queen Elizabeth had dealt with the Great Mogul of the Indian subcontinent with genuine respect, at least in part because his revenues in the early seventeenth century were some 20 times greater than those of the English monarchy. Even Napoleon had pretended to regard the shah of Persia as an equal. Then came the Industrial Revolution in Europe, iron and steel ships, heavier naval guns, and more accurate rifles. Democratic and nationalist movements produced large and unified European peoples, united in the service and financial support of their governments. Seemingly endless wealth, with modern administration, allowed European governments to tax, borrow, and spend without apparent limit. The modern nation-states loomed as enormous power complexes without precedent in the world’s history. At the same time it so happened that all the principal non-European empires were in decay. They were receiving a minimum of support from their own subjects. As in the eighteenth century when the disintegration of the Mogul empire had enabled the British to take over India, so in the nineteenth century the political weakness and vulnerabilities of the sultan of Turkey, the sultan of Zanzibar, the shah of Persia, the emperor of China, and the shogun of Japan made European intervention remarkably easy. Only the Japanese were able to revolutionize their government in time to ward off imperialist penetration. Even the Japanese, however, were restricted by early treaties that controlled their tariff policies until after 1900.

So great was the difference in the sheer mechanics of power that usually a mere show of force allowed the Europeans to impose their will. A garrison of only 75,000 troops long held India for the British. Numerous sporadic little wars were constantly fought—Afghan wars, Burmese wars, Zulu wars—which passed unnoticed by Europeans in the home country and were no more like a true national war or national military mobilization than the operations of the United States army against the Indians of the western plains. The Spanish-American War of 1898 and the Boer War of 1899 were also wars of colonial type, fought between entirely unequal parties. Often a show of naval strength was enough. It was the classic age of the punitive bombardment. We have seen how the American Commodore Perry threatened to bombard Tokyo in 1854. In 1856 the British consul at Canton, to punish acts of violence against Europeans, called upon the local British admiral to bombard that Chinese city. In 1863 the British bombarded Satsuma, and in 1864 an allied force including Americans bombarded Choshu—precipitating revolution in Japan. Similarly, Alexandria was bombarded in 1882 and Zanzibar in 1896. The usual consequence was that the local ruler signed a treaty, reorganized the government, or accepted a European (usually British) adviser.

Incentives and Motives

Behind the aggressiveness lay many pressures. The Europeans could not maintain for themselves the style of life to which they had become accustomed except by bringing the rest of the world within their orbit. But many other needs felt in Europe drove people into distant, unknown places. Catholic and Protestant groups sent growing numbers of missionaries to remote regions, where they sometimes got into trouble with the local people and where some missionaries were even killed. Public opinion in the home countries, soon learning of such events by ocean cable, might clamor for political action to suppress such outbreaks of anti-Christian violence. Similarly, scientists required geographical expeditions for their observations and discoveries. Wealthy persons traveled more, now that travel was so easy; they hunted tigers or elephants, or simply went to see the sights. It seemed only reasonable at the close of the nineteenth century that all Europeans wherever they might choose to go should enjoy the personal security and the orderly legal procedures that European governments sought to provide for the Western people who visited or lived in their overseas empires.

Economically, European life required material goods, many of which only tropical regions could supply. Even the working classes now drank tea or coffee every day. After the American Civil War Europe relied for its cotton increasingly on Africa and the East. Rubber and petroleum became staple needs. The lowly jute, which grew only in India, was used to make burlap, twine, carpets, and the millions of jute bags employed in commerce. The lordly coconut tree had innumerable common uses, which led to its intensive cultivation in the Dutch Indies. Various parts of it could be eaten, or manufactured into bags, brushes, cables, rope, sails, or doormats or converted into coconut oil, which in turn went into the making of candles, soap, margarine, and many other products.

Industrial countries also attempted to sell their own products, and one of the reasons given by imperialists, in support of imperialism, was the urgent necessity of finding new markets. The industrialization of Germany, the United States, Japan, and other countries, after about 1870, meant that they competed with each other and with Great Britain for foreign trade. The slowly declining price level after 1873 meant that a business firm had to sell more goods to turn over the same amount of money. Competition was more intense. The advanced industrial countries, as we have seen, raised tariffs to keep out each other’s products. It was therefore argued that each industrialized nation must develop a colonial empire, an area of “sheltered markets,” as the phrase went in England, in which the home country would supply manufactured goods in return for raw materials. The idea was to create a large self-sufficient trading unit, embracing various climates and types of resources, protected if necessary from outside competition by tariffs, guaranteeing a market for all its members and wealth and prosperity for the home country. This phase of imperialism is often called neomercantilism, since it revived in substance the mercantilism, or national economic systems, of the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries.

Purely financial considerations also characterized the new imperialism.

Money invested in the so-called “backward” countries by the close of the nineteenth century brought a higher rate of return than if invested in the more industrialized ones. For this there were many reasons, including the cheap labor of non-European regions, the heavy and unsatisfied demand for non-European products, and the greater risk of losses in half-unknown areas where European ideas of law and order did not prevail. By 1900 western Europe and the northeastern United States were equipped with their basic industrial apparatus. Their railway networks and first factories were built. Opportunities for investment in these countries became stabilized. At the same time, these countries themselves accumulated capital seeking an outlet. In the mid-century most exported capital was British-owned. By the close of the century more French, German, American, Dutch, Belgian, and Swiss investors were investing or lending outside their own borders. In 1850, most exported capital went to build up Europe, the United States, Canada, Australia, or Argentina. By 1900 more of it was going to undeveloped regions in other parts of the world. This capital was the property of individual small savers or of large banking combinations. Investors preferred “civilized” political control over the parts of Asia, Africa, or Latin America in which their railroads, mines, plantations, government loans, or other investments were situated. Hence the profit motive, or desire to invest “surplus” capital, promoted imperialism.

This analysis was put forward by critics like the English socialist J. A. Hobson, who wrote an influential book on imperialism in 1903, and later by Lenin, in his Imperialism, the Highest Stage of World Capitalism, written in 1916. They ascribed imperialism primarily to the accumulation of surplus capital and condemned it on socialist grounds. Hobson argued that a change in the domestic economy would remove the main motive for imperialism: if more of the national income went to workers as wages, and less of it to capitalists as interest and dividends, or if wealthy people were more heavily taxed and the money used for social welfare, there would be no surplus of capital and no real imperialism. Since the working class, if this were done, would also have more purchasing power, it would be less necessary to look endlessly for new markets outside the country. But the surplus capital explanation of imperialism was not entirely convincing. That investors and exporters were instrumental in the rise of imperialism was of course very true. That imperialism arose essentially from the capitalists’ pressure to invest abroad was more doubtful. Perhaps even more basic was Europe’s need for imports—only by enormous imports could Europe sustain its dense population, complex industry, and high standard of living. It was the demand for such imports—cotton, cocoa, coffee, copper, and the like drawn from the colonies—that made investment in the colonies financially profitable. Moreover, non-Europeans themselves often asked for the capital, glad though the European lenders were to lend it at high rates. In 1890 this might mean merely that a shah or sultan wanted to build himself a new palace, but the need of non-Europeans for Western capital was basic, nor was it to decline in later times. Lastly, the imperialism of some countries, notably Russia and Italy, which had little capital and few modern-type capitalists of their own, could not reasonably be attributed to pressure for lucrative foreign investments.

For the British, however, the capitalistic incentive was of great importance. We have seen how the British, in 1914, had $20 billion invested outside Great Britain, a quarter of all their wealth. About half, or $10 billion, was invested in the British Empire. Only a tenth of French foreign investments was in French colonies. French investment in the colonial world in general, however, including Egypt, Suez, South Africa, and Asia in addition to the French colonies, amounted to about a fifth of all French foreign investments. Only an infinitesimal fraction of German foreign investment in 1914 was in German colonies, which were of slight value. A fifth of German foreign investments, however, was placed in Africa, Asia, and the Ottoman Empire. These sums are enough to suggest the pressures upon the European governments to assert political influence in Africa, Turkey, or China.

In addition, French investors (including small bourgeois and even affluent peasants) had in 1914 a huge stake in the Russian empire. Russia, an imperial power with respect to adjoining countries in the Balkans and Asia, occupied an almost semicolonial status with respect to western Europe. The tsardom until its demise in 1917, not unlike the Ottoman sultanate or the Qing dynasty in China, was kept going by foreign loans, predominantly French. The French in 1914 had lent over $2 billion to Russia, more than to all colonial regions combined. For these huge outlays the motivation was at least as much political as economic. The French government urged French banks to buy Russian bonds. The aim was not merely to make a profit for bankers and small investors but to build up and hold together a military ally against Germany.

Politics went along with economics in the whole process of imperialist expansion. National security, both political and economic, was as important an aim as the accumulation of private wealth. So, too, was the growing concern in many quarters over the economic security and welfare of the working classes. The ideas of the British statesman Joseph Chamberlain (1836-1914) illustrated how these motives entered into imperialist thinking.

Chamberlain, father of Neville Chamberlain, who was to be prime minister of Britain in the years just prior to the Second World War, began as a Birmingham manufacturer, the type of man who a generation before would have been a staunch free trader and upholder of laissez-faire. Discarding the old individualism, he came to believe that the community should and could take better care of its members and that the British community (or empire) could advance the welfare of Britons. As mayor of Birmingham he introduced a kind of municipal socialism, including public ownership of utilities. As colonial secretary from 1895 to 1903, he preached Britain’s need for “a great self-sustaining and self-protecting empire” in an age of rising international competition—a worldwide British trading area, developed by British capital, which would give a secure source of raw materials and food, markets for exports, and a steady level of profits, wages, and employment.

Chamberlain saw with misgivings the tendencies toward independence in Canada, New Zealand, and the Australian Commonwealth. For these dominions he favored complete self-government, but he hoped that, once assured of virtual independence, they would reknit their ties with each other and with Great Britain. Britain and its dominions, in Chamberlain’s view, should pool their resources not only for military defense but also for economic well-being. The dominions had already levied tariffs against British manufacturers in order to build up their own. Chamberlain urged the dominions to charge a lower duty on British wares than on the same wares coming from foreign countries. In return, he even proposed that Great Britain adopt a protective tariff, so that it might then favor Canadian or Australian goods by offering them a lower rate. His plan was to bind the empire together by economic bonds, making it a kind of tariff union, or system of “imperial preference.” Since Britain imported mainly meat and cereals from the dominions, Chamberlain was obliged to recommend a tariff even upon these products—to “tax the people’s food,” repudiating the very ark of the covenant of Free Trade upon which the British economy had rested for half a century. The proposal was rejected. Chamberlain died in 1914, his goal unaccomplished. But after the First World War the British Empire, or Commonwealth of Nations, followed closely the proposals he had mapped out.

Whether the economic welfare and security of the European working classes was advanced by imperialism is still debated. It is probable that the worker in western Europe did gain economic benefits from imperialism.

Socially conservative imperialists were joined in this belief by thinkers of the extreme Left. Marx himself, followed by Lenin, thought that the European worker obtained higher real wages through the inflow of low-priced colonial goods. To Marxists this was unfortunate, for it gave European workers a vested interest in imperialism, made the European proletariat “opportunistic” (i.e., unrevolutionary), and blocked the formation of a true international world proletariat of all races.

Another imperialist argument much heard at the time held that European countries must acquire colonies to which surplus population could migrate without altogether abandoning the native land. It seemed unfortunate, for example, that so many Germans or Italians emigrating to the United States should be lost to the fatherland. This argument was purely specious. No European country after 1870 acquired any colony to which European families in any numbers wished to move. The millions who were still leaving Europe persisted in heading for the Americas, where in the circumstances no European colony could be founded.

The competitive nature of the European state system introduced other almost exclusively political features. The European states had to guard their security against each other. They had to keep some kind of balance among themselves, in the overseas world as in Europe. Hence, as in the scramble for Africa, one government often hurriedly annexed territory simply for fear that another might do so first. Or again, colonies came to have an intangible but momentous value in symbolism and prestige. To have colonies was a normal criterion of greatness. It was the sign of having arrived as a Great Power. Britain and France had had colonies for centuries.

Therefore the new powers formed in the 1860s—Germany, Italy, Japan, and in a sense the United States—came to believe they had to have colonies also.

Imperialism as Crusade

Imperialism arose from the commercial, industrial, financial, scientific, political, journalistic, intellectual, religious, and humanitarian impulses of Europe compounded together. It was an outthrust of modern Western civilization, and its advocates claimed that it would bring civilization and enlightenment to those who still sat in darkness. Faith in “modern civilization” had become a kind of substitute religion. Imperialism was its crusade.

So the British spoke of the White Man’s Burden; the French, of their mission civilisatrice; the Germans, of diffusing Kultur; the Americans, of the “blessings of Anglo-Saxon protection.” Social Darwinism and popular anthropology taught the racist doctrine that the white races were “fitter” or more gifted than the peoples of other races. Some imperialists argued, more reasonably, that the “backwardness” of non-European societies was due to historic, and hence temporary, causes but that for a long period into the future the civilized whites must keep a guardianship over their darker proteges. The psychology of imperialism contained strands of idealism and humanitarianism as well as greed, and numerous Europeans went to the colonies to build schools or hospitals rather than railroads or mines. Young people of good family left the pleasant lands of Devonshire or Poitou to spend long and lonely years in hot, isolated places, sustained by the thought that they were advancing the work of humanity. It was a good thing to put down slave raiding, torture, and famine; to combat degrading superstitions; to fight the diseases of neglect and filth; and to promote the ideas and institutions of legal justice (even though colonial legal systems did not treat the colonizers and native people in the same way). But these accomplishments, however real, went along all too obviously with European self-interest and were expressed with unbearable complacency and gross condescension to the larger part of the human race. As Rudyard Kipling wrote in 1899 (in his exhortation to Americans after their taking over of the Philippines):

Take up the White Man’s burden—

Send out the best ye breed—

Go bind your sons to exile,

To serve your captives’need;

To wait in heavy harness,

On fluttered folk and wild—

Your new-caught sullen peoples,

Half devil and half child.

78. THE AMERICAS

After the general considerations above, let us examine each of the earth’s great regions in turn, and first the Americas, where we must begin our discussion earlier in the century, before the age of the “new imperialism.”

In America the breakup of the Spanish and Portuguese empires in the first quarter of the nineteenth century, during and after the Napoleonic wars, left the vast tract from Colorado to Cape Horn very unsettled. Most of the people were Indian or a mixture of Indian and white (mestizo), with clusters here and there of pure European stock, which the nineteenth-century immigration was greatly to increase. In the former Spanish empire, except in inaccessible spots, the Spanish culture and language predominated. In Brazil, in the former Portuguese empire, the culture was Portuguese, and the country, though independent after 1822, remained a monarchy (or “empire”) until 1889, when it became a republic. In the former Spanish domains the disappearance of royal control left a large number of weak and unstable republics, chronically engaged in border disputes with one another. Fortunately for these republics, at the time of independence in the 1820s, European imperialism was at a low ebb. We have seen how the Congress of Verona considered ways of returning them to Spain but was opposed by Great Britain and how the United States, in 1823, supplemented the British action by announcing the Monroe Doctrine. But the first external military threat to one of the new republics actually came from the United States.

The United States and Mexico

Mexico, on becoming independent of Spain, reached almost to the Mississippi and the Rocky Mountains. Hardly was it independent when land seekers from the United States swarmed over its northeastern borders. They brought with them their slaves, to grow the cotton so voraciously demanded in industrial England. The Mexican Republic did not allow slavery. The newcomers proclaimed their own republic, which they called Texas. Agitation developed for annexation to the United States. Mexico objected, but in 1845 the United States annexed Texas. A war followed, in which Mexico lost to the United States not only Texas but the whole region from Texas to the California coast. As is usual in such affairs, the loser preserved a longer memory than the winner. It soon seemed only natural in the United States to possess these regions; in Mexico many decades had to pass before the wound was healed. Mexico had lost half its territory to an aggressive neighbor within the first generation of its independence. Meanwhile, though some Americans condemned the war, most people in the United States justified this vast annexation of Mexican territory by arguing that their nation was far better prepared than Mexico to develop a modern economy and government in the region.

The next threat to Mexico came from Europe. Mexico, at a time of internal disorders, had contracted large loans on exorbitant terms. When the liberal president Benito Juárez (a pure-blooded Indian and thus at least racially “non-European”) repudiated the loans, the European bondholders demanded satisfaction from their governments. The United States was paralyzed by the Civil War. Great Britain, France, and Spain, which had never recognized the Monroe Doctrine, in 1861 sent combined military forces to Veracruz. The British proposed seizure of the customs houses in Mexican ports and appropriation of the custom revenues to pay off the debt (an expedient introduced in China three years before); but the French had more ambitious designs. Unknown both to the British, who wanted only to collect debts, and to the Spanish, who dreamed of setting up a new Bourbon monarchy in Mexico, the Emperor Napoleon III had a secret project for establishing a French satellite state in Mexico, which French capital and exports might subsequently develop. He planned to create a Mexican empire with the Austrian archduke Maximilian as its figurehead emperor. The British and Spanish disapprovingly withdrew their forces. The French army proceeded into the interior and installed Maximilian on a very shaky imperial throne. Maximilian reigned for some years, but Napoleon III gradually concluded that conquest of Mexico was impossible or too expensive. It further appeared, by 1865, that the United States was not going to collapse after all, as expected and even hoped for by the European governing classes. The United States protested strongly to the French government. The French withdrew, Maximilian was captured and shot, and Juárez and the Mexican liberals came back to power.

The United States before 1870 had thus in turn both despoiled and protected the adjoining part of Latin America. This ambivalent situation became characteristic of the New World. As the United States became a great power, the Monroe Doctrine became an effective barrier to European territorial ambitions. Latin America never became subject to imperialism as completely as did Asia and Africa. On the other hand, the United States became the imperialist power feared above all others south of the border. It was the Yanqui menace, the Colossus of the North.

In the 1870s in the course of its turbulent politics, both citizens of Mexico and foreign residents were obliged to pay forced loans to rival leaders. The State Department in Washington demanded that American citizens be reimbursed by the Mexican government. The double standard characteristic of imperialism—one standard for “civilized” and one for “uncivilized” states—became clear in the exchange of notes. The Mexican government under Porfirio Díaz attempted to lay down the principle that “foreigners locating in a country accepted the mode of life of the people ... and participated not only in the benefits of such residence but also in the adversities. Foreigners should enjoy the same guarantees and the same legal protection as natives, but no more.” The Mexicans observed that the United States had never recognized the claims of foreigners for losses sustained in its Civil War. The United States, under President Hayes, held on the other hand that citizens of advanced states, operating in more primitive regions, should continue to enjoy the security of property characteristic of their home countries. When on another occasion the United States sent troops to the border, and the Mexicans objected, the secretary of state remarked on “the volatile and childish character of these people and their incapacity to treat a general question with calmness and without prejudice.” Mexico retorted that the United States had “disregarded all the rules of international law and practice of civilized nations and treated the Mexicans as savages, as Kaffirs of Africa.”

It was, in fact, a principle of international law in the nineteenth century that “civilized” states might not intervene in each other’s affairs but had the right of intervention in so-called “backward” countries. In the dispute of 1877 the United States classified Mexico as backward and as “volatile and childish.” The Mexicans objected to being treated like “savages and Kaffirs,” and not like a civilized nation. The leaders of both nations thus agreed that there were different legal standards for “civilized” and “uncivilized” nations, but they strongly disagreed on which of the two standards should apply in Mexico.

United States Imperialism in the 1890s

The 1890s saw a crescendo of imperialism both in Europe and in the United States. In 1895, in a resounding restatement of the Monroe Doctrine, President Cleveland forbade the British to deal directly with Venezuela in a boundary dispute affecting British Guiana. The British were obliged to accept international arbitration. When, however, adjacent Colombia faced a revolution in the Isthmus of Panama, the United States supported the revolutionaries and, consulting nobody, recognized Panama as an independent republic. Here the United States leased and fortified a Canal Zone, over which it long kept control, and proceeded to build the Panama Canal.

Panama became in effect a protectorate of the United States.

Meanwhile what was left of the old Spanish American empire, confined to Cuba and Puerto Rico, was agitated by revolutionary movements that were fighting for national independence. Sympathies in the United States lay with the revolutionaries, but every sign of the new imperialism showed itself unmistakably in the American response to these conflicts. Americans had $50 million invested in Cuba. They bought the bonds issued by Cuban revolutionaries in New York. Cuban sugar, whose production was disrupted by political troubles, was necessary to the famed American standard of living. An orderly and amenable Cuba was vital to American strategic interests in the Caribbean, in the soon-to-be-built canal and in the Pacific. The barbarity of the Spanish authorities was deplored as an outrage to modern civilization. The newspapers, especially the new “yellow” press, roused the American public to a fury of moral indignation and imperial self-assertion. The climax came when an American warship, the Maine, sank under mysterious circumstances in Havana harbor. (Most historians now believe the ship exploded because of a mechanical flaw.)

The United States easily won the ensuing war with Spain in 1898. Puerto Rico was annexed outright, as were the Philippine Islands on the other side of the world. Filipino nationalists fought against the American annexation in a bloody six-year insurgency that took the lives of more than 4,000 Americans, 20,000 Filipino insurgents, and some 200,000 civilians; but the United States eventually managed to turn the Philippines into a new East Asian colony. Meanwhile, Cuba was set up as an independent republic, subject to the Platt Amendment, a series of provisions by which the United States obtained the right to oversee Cuba’s relations with foreign powers and to intervene in Cuba on matters pertaining to “life, property, individual liberty,” and “Cuban independence.” Thus the United States obtained another protectorate in the Caribbean. The American government proceeded to intervene directly in Cuba on several occasions during the following two decades—interventions that were remembered much longer in Cuba than in the United States. The growth of Cuban nationalism and the subsiding of American imperialism led to repeal of the Platt Amendment in 1934 and recognition of Cuban independence. The United States retained only the right to a permanent lease on a naval base in Guantanamo Bay. Later, after the Second World War, the Philippines formally received independence in 1946 and Puerto Rico became a self-governing commonwealth in 1952.

It was under President Theodore Roosevelt, the peppery “hero of San Juan hill,” that the imperial power of the United States was most emphatically trumpeted. He announced in 1904 that weakness or misbehavior “which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society may ... require intervention by some civilized nation,” and that the Monroe Doctrine might force the United States “to the exercise of an international police power.” In the following year Santo Domingo fell into such financial disorder that European creditors were alarmed. To forestall any pretext for European intervention, the United States sent a financial administrator to Santo Domingo, reformed the economy of the country, and impounded half the customs receipts to pay its debts. Roosevelt declared—in what came to be known as the “Roosevelt Corollary” to the Monroe Doctrine—that, because the United States would not permit European states to intervene in America to collect debts, it must itself assume the duty of intervention to safeguard the investments of the civilized world. The Monroe Doctrine, initially a negative warning to Europe, now stood with the new corollary as a positive notice of supervision of all the Americas by the United States. A quarter of a century of “dollar diplomacy” followed, in which the United States repeatedly intervened, by military or other means, in the Caribbean and Mexico. But the Roosevelt Corollary, like the Platt Amendment, created so much anger and hostility in Latin America that the Washington government finally repudiated it.

The story of American intervention in the Hawaiian Islands was as typical of the new imperialism as any episode in the history of European empires. Known originally to outsiders as the Sandwich Islands, these spots of land long enjoyed isolation in the vastness of the mid-Pacific. The growth of global navigation in the nineteenth century, however, brought a new population of sailors, whalers, missionaries, and vendors of rum and cloth to the islands by 1840. The native ruler, lacking the power to control this new situation, almost accepted a British protectorate in 1843 and in 1875 did accept a virtual protectorate by the United States, which guaranteed Hawaiian independence against any third party, obtained trading privileges, and acquired Pearl Harbor as a naval base. American capital and management entered the island. They created huge sugar and pineapple industries, entirely dependent on export to, and investment by, the United States. In 1891, when Queen Liliuokalani came to the throne, she tried to check westernization and Americanization. The American interests, endangered by her nativist policies, overthrew the queen and set up an independent republic, which soon sought annexation to the United States. It was the story of Texas reenacted. For several years the issue hung in the balance because of lingering disapproval in the United States for such strong-arm methods. But after reconsidering the global situation at a time when Japan was revealing its imperial aspirations in Asia, the European powers were moving into China, the Philippines were becoming an American colony, and the Panama Canal was being planned to facilitate access to the Pacific Ocean, the United States “accepted its destiny” in the Pacific, and annexed the Hawaiian Republic by joint resolution of Congress in 1898. Hawaii became a state in the American union in 1959.

79. THE DISSOLUTION OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE

The Ottoman Empire in the 1850s

Of all parts of the non-European world, the Ottoman, or Turkish, Empire was the nearest to Europe. The major European states had a long history of relations with the Ottoman Empire because of its geographical proximity and also because of its strategic dominance in the eastern Mediterranean. The empire still extended in the nineteenth century from Hungary and the Balkan peninsula to the south Russian steppes and from Algeria to the Persian Gulf. The empire was not at all like a European state. Immense in extent, it was a complex social and political system within which people belonged to diverse and often overlapping religious communities. Most of its people were Muslim, including both orthodox Muslims and such reform sects as Druses and Wahabis; some were Jews who had always lived in the Middle East; many were Christian, principally Greek Orthodox and Armenian, who had also always lived there. The Turks were the ruling class and Islam was the dominant religion. Only Muslims, for example, could serve in the army; non-Muslims were known as raya, the “flock” or “herd”—they paid the taxes. Persons of different religion lived side by side, each under the laws, courts, and customs of his or her own religious group. Religious officials—patriarchs, bishops, rabbis, imams, ulemas—were responsible to the Turkish government for their own people, over whom therefore they had a great deal of authority.

Western Europeans had their own special rights. Roman Catholic clergy, living mainly in Palestine, looked to the pope in religion and to France for a mundane protector.

Western merchants enjoyed the regime of the “capitulations,” or special rights granted by the Ottoman government in numerous treaties going back to the sixteenth century. By the capitulations Turkey could not levy a tariff of more than 8 percent on imported goods. Europeans were exempt from most taxes. Cases involving two Europeans, civil or criminal, could be settled only in a court held by a European consul under European law. Disputes between a European and an Ottoman subject were settled in Turkish courts, but in the presence of a European observer.

The Ottoman Empire, in short, lacked the European idea of nationalism or national unity. European ideas of sovereignty and a uniform law for all its peoples were also absent, as was the idea of the secular state, or of law and citizenship separated from religion. More generally, the empire had fallen behind modern industrial nations in its scientific, mechanical, material, humanitarian, and administrative achievements.

Turkey was called the “sick man of Europe,” and its long decline constituted the Eastern Question. Since the loss of Hungary in 1699 the Ottoman Empire had entered on a long process of territorial disintegration (see map, p. 649). That the empire lasted another two centuries was due to the European balance of power. But by the 1850s the empire was falling away at the edges. Russia had advanced in the Crimea and the Caucasus. Serbia was autonomous, Greece was independent, and Romania was recognized as a self-governing principality. The French occupied Algeria. A native Arab dynasty, the Sauds, of the Wahabi reform sect, ruled over much of Arabia. A former Turkish governor of Egypt, Mehemet Ali, had established his family as hereditary rulers or “khedives” in the Nile valley. Notwithstanding these changes, the Ottoman Empire in the 1850s was still huge. It encompassed not only the Turkish or Anatolian peninsula (including Armenia and territory south of the Caucasus) but also the central portion of the Balkan peninsula from Constantinople to die Adriatic where many Christians of Slavic nationality lived, Tripoli (as Libya was then called) in North Africa, and the islands of Crete and Cyprus. Egypt and Arabia, though autonomous, were still under the nominal suzerainty of the sultan.

The Crimean War of 1854-1856 opened a new phase in Ottoman history as in that of Europe. We have seen how this war was followed by the consolidation of great nationstates in Europe and how the United States, Canada, and Japan consolidated or modernized themselves at the same time. The Turks tried to do the same between 1856 and 1876.

In the Crimean War the Turks were on the winning side, but the war affected them as it affected Russia, the loser. Exposing their military and political weakness, it pointed up the need of better organization. The outcome of the war was taken to prove the superiority of the political systems of England and France. It was therefore on Western lines that Turkish reformers wished to remodel. It was not merely that they wished to defend themselves against another of the periodic wars with Russia. They wished also to avoid being periodically saved from Russia by the West, a process which if continued could lead only to French or British control of Turkey.

Attempts at Reform and Revival, 1856-1876

In 1856 the Ottoman government issued the Hatt-i Humayun, the most far-reaching Turkish reform edict of the century. Its purpose was to create an Ottoman national citizenship for all persons in the empire. It abolished the civil authority of religious hierarchs. Equality before the law was guaranteed, as was eligibility to public office without regard to religion. The army was opened to Christians and Muslims alike, and steps were even taken to include both in nonsegregated military units. The edict announced a reform of taxes, security of property for all, abolition of torture, and reform of prisons. It promised to combat the chronic evils of graft, bribery, and extortion by public officials.

For 20 years there were serious efforts to make the reform decree of 1856 a reality. Western and liberal ideas circulated freely. Newspapers were founded. Writers called for a national Turkish revival, threw off the old Persian style in literature, composed histories of the Ottomans, and translated Montesquieu and Rousseau. Foreign loans entered the country. Railroads joined the Black Sea and the Danube. Abdul Aziz (1861-1876), the first sultan to travel to Europe, visited Vienna, London, and the great Paris world’s fair of 1867. But powerful resistance developed against such radical changes. Also, the best efforts of the Turkish reformers miscarried. There were too few Turks with skill or experience in the work required, and there was too much dependence on borrowed money. In 1874 the Ottoman government, having recklessly overborrowed, repudiated half its debt.

A new and more determined reforming minister. Midhat Pasha, goaded by opposition and desperate at the weight of inertia, deposed Abdul Aziz in 1876, deposed the latter’s nephew three months later, and set up Abdul Hamid II as sultan. The new sultan at first briskly went along with the reform movement, proclaiming a new constitution in 1876. It declared the Ottoman Empire to be indivisible, and promised personal liberty, freedom of conscience, freedom of education and the press, and parliamentary government. The first Turkish parliament met in 1877. Its members earnestly addressed themselves to reform. But they reckoned without Abdul Hamid, who in 1877 revealed his true intentions. The sultan got rid of Midhat, packed off the parliament, and threw away the constitution.

Repression after 1876

Abdul Hamid reigned for 33 years, from 1876 to 1909. For all this time he lived in fear and isolation, fighting ferociously against forces that he could not understand. Once when a consignment of dynamos reached the Turkish customs, it was held up by fearful officials, because the contents were declared to make several hundred revolutions per minute. Again, chemistry books for use in the new American college were pronounced seditious, because their chemical symbols might be a secret cipher. The sultan sensed that tempering with the old Ottoman way would lead to ruin. He dreaded any moves to check his own whim or power. He was thrown into a panic by Turkish reformers and westernizers, who became increasingly driven to terrorist acts in the face of his opposition. Driven away by Abdul Hamid, some tens of thousands of Young Turks, the activists of the reform era before 1876, or their children and successors, lived in exile in Paris, London, or Geneva, plotting their return to Turkey and vengeance upon Abdul the Damned. The sultan was frightened also by agitation among his non-Turkish subjects. Nationalist Armenians, Bulgars, Macedonians, and Cretans defied and taunted the Ottoman authorities, which responded with the Bulgarian massacres of 1876 and the Armenian massacres of 1894. These horrible butcheries of thousands of peasants by Ottoman troops came as a shock to Europeans, who were no longer accustomed to such violence within their own nation-states. Last, and with good reason, Abdul Hamid lived in a creeping fear of the designs of the imperialist European powers upon his dissolving empire.

A thoroughly reformed, consolidated, and modernized Ottoman Empire was far from what the European governments desired. They might wish for humanitarian reforms in Turkey, for more efficiency and honesty in Turkish government and finance, and even for a Turkish parliamentary system. Such demands were eloquently expressed by liberals like Gladstone in England. But no one in Europe wanted what Turkish reformers wanted, a reinvigorated Ottoman Empire that could deal with Europe politically as an equal.

The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-1878. The Congress of Berlin

In Russia, since the time of Catherine II in the eighteenth century, many had dreamed of installing Russian power on the shores of the Bosporus. Constantinople they called Tsarigrad, the Imperial City, which Orthodoxy was to liberate from the infidel. Crusading motives, in a nationalist and imperialist age, reappeared anew in the form of Pan-Slavism. This was now a doctrine preached by leading Russians, including the novelist Dostoevski and the publicist Danilevsky.

Danilevsky’s Russia and Europe, published in 1871, predicted that Russia would enter into a long war with Europe, which would then be followed by the creation of a grand federation of the East. The new eastern federation would include Slavs, Greeks, Hungarians, and parts of Asian Turkey under Russian control. This type of Pan-Slavism was patronized by the Russian government because it diverted attention from internal and revolutionary troubles. As for the Slav peoples of the Ottoman Empire, they were willing to use Russian Pan-Slavism as a means of combating their Turkish rulers. Insurrection against the Turks broke out in the Balkans during the mid-1870s. In 1877 Russia declared war on Turkey. Russia was on the move against the Ottoman Empire for the sixth time in a hundred years.

The British, who had fought Russia over Turkey in 1854, were prepared to do so again. A number of recent developments added to their apprehension. The Suez Canal was completed in 1869, and the Canal’s location within the Ottoman Empire restored the Middle East to its ancient position as a crossroads of world trade. In 1874 Benjamin Disraeli, a Conservative and an imperialist, became prime minister of Great Britain. By a sudden coup in the following year he was able to buy up, from the almost bankrupt ruling khedive of Egypt, 44 percent of the shares of the Suez Canal Company. In 1876, in a dramatic affirmation of imperial splendor, he had Queen Victoria take the title of empress of India. British commercial and financial interests in India and the Far East were growing, and the Suez Canal, of which the British government was now the principal stockholder, was becoming the lifeline of the empire. But the Ottoman state, and hence the whole Middle East, was now collapsing before the Russians, whose armies advanced rapidly through the Balkans, reached Constantinople, and forced the Turks to sign a treaty in 1878, the treaty of San Stefano. By this treaty Turkey ceded to Russia strategic territory on the south side of the Caucasus Mountains, gave full independence to Serbia and Romania, promised reforms in Bosnia, and granted autonomy to a new Bulgarian state, whose boundaries were to be very generously drawn and which was expected to fall under Russian domination. England seethed with a popular clamor for war against Russia. The outcry gave the word “jingoism” to the language:

We don’t want to fight, but by jingo, if we do,

We’ve got the men, we’ve got the ships, we’ve got the money too.

It now appeared that Turkey’s inability to fend off foreigners from its borders would precipitate at least an Anglo-Russian and possibly a general European war. But war was averted by diplomacy. Bismarck assembled a congress of all the European great powers at Berlin in 1878. Once again Europe attempted to assert itself as a unity, to restore life to the much-battered Concert of Europe by dealing collectively with the common problem presented by the Eastern Question. The congress in effect initiated a partition of the Ottoman domain, thereby keeping peace in Europe at the expense of Turkey. The European balance now both protected and dismembered Turkey at the same time.

The Russians were persuaded at Berlin to give up the treaty of San Stefano that they had imposed on the Turks, but they held on to the territory they had gained below the Caucasus Mountains and won independence for the Serbs and Romanians. Montenegro, too, was recognized as an independent state. Bulgaria was divided into three zones with varying degrees of autonomy, all still nominally within the Ottoman Empire. Austria-Hungary was authorized by the congress to “occupy and administer” Bosnia (but not annex it) in compensation for the spread of Russian influence in the Balkans. To the British the Turks ceded Cyprus, a large island not far from the Suez Canal. The French were told that they might expand from Algeria into Tunisia. To the Italians (who counted least) it was more vaguely hinted that they might later be allowed to expand across the Adriatic into Albania. As Bismarck put it, “the Italians have such a large appetite and such poor teeth.” Germany took nothing. Bismarck said he was the “honest broker” with no interest except in European peace.

The treaty of Berlin in 1878 dispelled the immediate threat of war. But it left many continuing problems which would contribute to the causes of the First World War 36 years later. Neither the Balkan nationalists nor the Russian Pan-Slavs were satisfied. The Turks, both reactionaries like Abdul Hamid and the revolutionary Young Turks in exile, were indignant that peace had been made by further dismemberment of their territory. The demonstrated weakness of Turkey was a constant temptation to all concerned. In the years before 1914 German influence grew. Germans and German capital entered Turkey, projecting, and partially completing, a great Berlin to Bagdad railway to be accompanied by the exploitation of Middle Eastern resources. The railroad was all but completed before 1914 despite the protests and representations of the Russians, the French, and particularly the British, who saw in it a direct threat to their empire in India.

Egypt and North Africa

For Egypt, technically autonomous within the Ottoman Empire, the 1850s and 1860s were a time of reform and economic development. The Egyptian government modernized its administration, court system, and property law, cooperated with the French in building the Suez Canal, encouraged shipping on the Red Sea, and let British and French interests construct railroads. Between 1861 and 1865, while the American South was unable to export raw cotton, the annual export of Egyptian cotton rose from 60 million to 250 million pounds. Egypt more than Turkey was drawn into the world market, and the khedive of Egypt became a Westernized ruler. The khedive Ismail built himself a fine new opera house in Cairo, where, in 1871, two years after the opening of the Suez Canal, Verdi’s Aïda, written at the khedive’s request, was resoundingly performed for the first time.

Such improvements cost a good deal of money, borrowed in England and France. The Egyptian government was soon in financial straits, only temporarily relieved by the sale of canal shares to Disraeli. By 1879 matters reached the point where Western banking interests forced the abdication of Ismail and his replacement by Tewfik, who soon let himself become thoroughly enmeshed by his creditors. This led to nationalistic protests within Egypt, headed by Colonel Arabi. In a pattern repeated in many parts of the colonial world, the nationalists opposed both the foreigners and their own government, charging it with being a mere front for foreign interests. Arabi’s movement, an early expression of Arab nationalism, led to riots in Alexandria, where Europeans had to flee aboard British and French shipping in the harbor. A British squadron then unceremoniously bombarded Alexandria. British troops (the French, though invited to take part, refused) disembarked in 1882 at Suez and Alexandria, defeated Arabi, and took Tewfik under their protection. The military intervention of 1882 was said by the British to be temporary, but British troops remained there for a long time, through two world wars and well into the twentieth century, not leaving until 1956. Egypt thus became a British protectorate. The British protected the khedive from discontent within his own country, from the claims of the Ottoman court, and from the rival attentions of other European powers.

The French strenuously objected when the British stayed on so long in Egypt. It had long been the French who had the greatest investments in the Middle East, and persons in that region who were at all westernized—Egyptians, Syrians, Turks—overwhelmingly preferred French language and culture to English. The French, harboring deep suspicion of British designs in Egypt, compensated themselves by building a North African empire farther west. They developed Algeria, assumed a protectorate over Tunisia, and began to penetrate Morocco. Upon these French advances the British, and soon the Germans, looked with unmitigated disfavor. Rivalry for the spoils of the Ottoman Empire thus created enmity among the Great Powers and constituted a fertile source of the war scares, fears, and diplomatic maneuvers that preceded the First World War.

The dissolution of the Ottoman Empire became indistinguishable from the whole chronic international crisis before 1914. It is enough to say here, to keep the fate of the Ottoman Empire in focus, that Abdul Hamid’s frantic defensive policies came to nothing and that the Young Turks won control of the Ottoman government in 1908. They forced the restoration of the constitution of 1876 and introduced many reforms. Finally, when all Europe became involved in war in 1914, Russia again declared war on Turkey, and the Turks came into the war on the side of Germany, whose political and economic influence in the empire had been steadily growing. During the war, with British aid, the Arabs detached themselves from the empire, becoming eventually independent Arab states. Egypt, too, ended all connections with the empire. In 1923 a Turkish republic was proclaimed. It was confined to Constantinople and the Anatolian peninsula, where the bulk of the Turkish people lived. The new republic proceeded to undergo a thorough nationalist and secular revolution.

80. THE PARTITION OF AFRICA

South of Mediterranean Africa lay the Sahara desert, and south of that lay sub-Saharan Africa, of which Europeans knew so little that they called it the Dark Continent. Africa is so gigantic that even the part south of the Sahara is almost as large as the whole continent of North America. For centuries Europeans knew only its coasts—the Gold Coast, Ivory Coast, Slave Coast—to which from an inexhaustible interior had come shackled processions of captive slaves, as well as the swelling waters of enormous rivers, like the Nile, Niger, and Congo, whose sources in the dim hinterland were a subject of romantic speculation. The people were black, but diverse both in physique and in culture, and speaking almost a thousand languages. They had been working with iron for more than 2,000 years, and they were adept in many arts, such as bronze sculpture, gold artifacts, weaving, basketry, and the making of ceremonial masks with strikingly symbolic or abstract patterns. Along the northern fringe some had converted to Islam, but mostly they adhered to their traditional religions.

They lived mainly in villages in tribal communities, engaged in agriculture or moving herds of cattle from place to place. But great cities or agglomerations had also arisen, from Timbuktu in the north with its old caravan trade across the Sahara, to the vast complex of buildings at Zimbabwe in the south, which was already in ruins when the Europeans first saw it. There had also been extensive kingdoms whose memory was preserved, in the absence of writing, by specially trained narrators from one generation to the next. But these kingdoms had disappeared or declined. They had been weakened by intertribal wars, by the slave trade which set Africans against one another to satisfy the demand of outsiders, or by demographic causes that are now hard to trace. Hence Africa, somewhat like the Ottoman Empire and China, met the assault of the Europeans at a time when its powers of resistance were reduced. Before the mid-nineteenth century there were no permanently resident whites south of the Sahara except for a few Arabs who had been on the east coast since the seventh century and the Europeans who had been at the Cape of Good Hope since 1652. In the Union of South Africa, when it was established in 1910, some 1.1 million whites lived along with about 5 million blacks.

The Opening of Africa

Missionaries, explorers, and individual adventurers first opened this world to Europe. The historic pair, Livingstone and Stanley, well illustrate the drift of Europe. Before the imperialist age, in 1841, the Scot David Livingstone arrived in southeast Africa as a medical missionary. He gave himself to humanitarian and religious work, with some occasional trading and much travel and exploration, but without political or economic aims. Exploring the Zambesi River, he was the first white man to look upon the Victoria Falls. Fully at home in inner Africa, safe and on friendly terms with its native people, he was quite content to be let alone. But the hectic forces of modern civilization sought him out. Word spread in Europe and America that Dr. Livingstone was lost. The New York Herald, to manufacture news, sent the roving journalist H. M. Stanley to find him, which he did in 1871. Livingstone soon died, deeply honored by the Africans among whom he worked. Stanley was a man of the new era. Seeing vast economic possibilities in Africa, he went to Europe to solicit backers. In 1878 he found someone with the same ideas, who happened to be a king, Leopold II, king of the Belgians.

Leopold, for all his royalty, was at heart a commercial promoter. China, Formosa, the Philippines, and Morocco had in turn attracted his fancy, but it was the central African basin of the Congo that he decided to develop. Stanley was exactly the man he was looking for, and the two founded at Brussels, with a few financiers, an International Congo Association in 1878. It was a purely private enterprise; the Belgian government and people had nothing to do with it. Europeans considered all Africa inland from the coasts to be, like America in the time of Columbus, a terra nullius, without government and claimed by nobody, wide open to the first Western persons who might arrive. Stanley, returning to the Congo in 1882, in a year or two concluded treaties with over 500 chiefs, who in return for a few trinkets or a few yards of cloth put their marks on his mysterious European papers and accepted the blue-and-gold flag of the Association.

Since the Dark Continent was still innocent of internal frontiers, no one could tell how much territory the Association might soon cover by these methods. The German explorer Karl Peters, working inland from Zanzibar, was signing treaties with the chiefs of East Africa. The Frenchman Brazza, departing from the west coast and distributing the tricolor in every village, was claiming on the Congo River itself a territory larger than France. The Portuguese aspired to join their ancient colonies of Angola and Mozambique into a trans-African empire, for which they required a generous portion of the interior. Britain supported Portugal. In every case the home governments in Europe were still hesitant over involvement in an Africa of which they knew little. But they were pushed on by small organized minorities of colonizing enthusiasts, and they faced the probability that if they missed the moment it would be too late.

Bismarck, who personally thought African colonies an absurdity but was sensitive to the new pressures, called another conference at Berlin in 1885, this time to submit the African question to international regulation. Most European states, as well as the United States, attended. The Berlin conference had two goals: to set up the territories of the Congo Association as an international state, under international auspices and restrictions; and to draft a code governing the way in which European powers wishing to acquire African territory should proceed.

The Congo Free State, which in 1885 took the place of the International Congo Association, was not only an international creation but also embodied in some ways what became known in the next century as international mandates or international trusteeships for non-European peoples. The Berlin conference specified that the new state should not be the colony of any power, including Belgium, but delegated its administration to Leopold. It drew the boundaries, making the Congo Free State almost as large as the United States east of the Mississippi, and it added certain specific provisions: the Congo River was internationalized, persons of all nationalities should be free to do business in the Congo state, there should be no tariff levied on imports, and the slave trade should be suppressed. Leopold in 1889 reassembled the signatory powers in a second conference, held at Brussels. The Brussels conference took further steps to root out the slave trade, which remained a stubborn though declining evil, because the Muslim world was several generations behind the Christian in abolishing slavery. The Brussels conference also undertook to protect the rights of the local people, correct certain glaring abuses, and reduce the traffic in liquor and firearms.

But all this effort at internationalism failed because Europe had no international machinery by which the hard daily work of enforcing general agreements could be carried out. Although slavery was banned, Leopold went his own way in the Congo. His determination to make it commercially profitable for his own benefit led him to unconscionable abuses. Europe and America demanded rubber and the rubber trees of the Congo were at the time one of the world’s few sources of supply. The Congo people, already afflicted by the diseases and weakening effects of a lowland equatorial climate, could be made to fulfill assigned quotas of rubber sap only by inhumanly severe coercion. Leopold and his agents, some of whom were African, and the managers of the concessions he leased out extorted forced labor from the native population, compelling them to meet impossible quotas under brutal conditions, with the resulting deaths of thousands. The rubber trees meanwhile were destroyed without any plans for replacement.

Leopold, by ravaging its resources and virtually enslaving its people, was able to draw from the Congo a handsome income and to amass a personal fortune. He nevertheless could not make the entire enterprise profitable and needed investment capital for further development. He therefore borrowed from his own government in 1889 and 1895 in return for giving the government the right to annex the Congo in 1901. The Belgian parliament turned down the opportunity that year, but beginning in 1904 public outrage mounted after European press revelations of the scandalous atrocities in the Congo. A concerted campaign compelled the Belgian government in 1908 to take the Congo over from Leopold, who died the following year. The Congo Free State became the Belgian Congo, a Belgian colony. Under the government’s administration the worst excesses of forced labor and other abuses were ended, even though the Congo remained a continuing enticement for enrichment and investment for Europeans and other outsiders.

The Berlin conference of 1885 had also laid down certain rules for imperial claims of African territories—a European power with holdings on the coast had prior rights in the hinterland; occupation must not be on paper only through drawing lines on a map, but must consist in real occupation by administrators or troops; and each power must give proper notice to the others as to what territories it considered its own. A wild scramble for “real occupation” quickly followed. In 15 years the entire continent was parceled out. The sole exceptions were Ethiopia, and, technically, Liberia, founded in 1822 as a colony for emancipated American slaves and virtually a protectorate of the United States.

Everywhere a variant of the same process was repeated. First would appear a handful of white men, bringing their inevitable treaties—sometimes printed forms. To get what they wanted, the Europeans commonly had to ascribe powers to the chief that by the customs of the tribe he did not possess—powers to convey sovereignty, sell land, or grant mining concessions. Thus the Africans were baffled at the outset by foreign legal conceptions. Then the Europeans would build up the position of the chief, since they themselves had no influence over the people. This led to the widespread system of “indirect rule,” by which colonial authorities acted through the existing chiefs and tribal forms. There were many things that only the chief could arrange, such as security for isolated Europeans, porter services, or gangs of workmen to build roads or railroads.

Labor was the overwhelming problem. For pure slavery Europeans now had an abhorrence, and they abolished it wherever they could. But the Africans, so long as they lived in their traditional way, did not react like the free wage earner postulated in European business and economics. They had little expectation of individual gain and almost no use for money. They thus seemed to work only sporadically by European standards, disdaining the continuous and tedious labor that Europeans wanted them to perform. The result was that Europeans all over Africa resorted to forced labor. For road building, systems like the French corvee before the Revolution reappeared. Or the chief would be required to supply a quota of able-bodied men for a certain length of time, and frequently he did so gladly to raise his own importance in the eyes of the Europeans. More indirect methods were also used. The colonial government might levy a hut tax or a poll tax, payable only in money, to obtain which the African would have to seek a job. Or the new government, once installed, might allocate so much land to Europeans as private property (another foreign conception) that the local tribe could no longer subsist on the lands that remained to it. Or the whole tribe might be moved to a reservation, like Indians in the United States. In any case, while the women tilled the fields or tended the stock at home, the men would move off to take jobs under the whites for infinitesimal pay. The men then lived in compounds, away from family and tribal kindred; they became demoralized; and the labor they gave, untrained and unwilling, would scarcely have been tolerated in more industrialized societies. In these circumstances everything was done to uproot the Africans, and little was done to benefit them or to protect the social systems in which they had lived before the Europeans arrived.

Conditions improved with the twentieth century as traditions of more enlightened colonial administration were gradually built up. Some colonial officials even came to serve as buffers or protectors of the local peoples against the intruding white man’s economic interests. Throughout, it was part of the ethos of imperialism to put down slavery, tribal warfare, superstition, disease, and illiteracy. Slowly a westernized class of Africans grew—chiefs and the sons of chiefs, Catholic priests and Protestant ministers, warehouse clerks and government employees. Young men from Nigeria or Uganda appeared as students at Oxford, the University of Paris, or universities in the United States. Westernized Africans usually resented both exploitation and paternalism. They showed signs of turning nationalistic, like their counterparts in the Ottoman Empire and Asia. If they wanted westernization, it was at a pace and for a purpose of their own, and with methods that recognized the value of their own cultural traditions. As the twentieth century progressed, nationalism in Africa grew more vocal, more intense, and more forceful in challenging the European powers.

Friction and Rivalry between the Powers

Meanwhile, in the 15 years from 1885 to 1900, the Europeans in Africa came dangerously near to open blows. The Portuguese annexed huge domains in Angola and Mozambique. The Italians took over two barren tracts, Italian Somaliland and Eritrea on the Red Sea. They then moved inland, in quest of more imposing possessions, to conquer Ethiopia and the headwaters of the Nile. Some 80,000 Ethiopians, however, defeated and routed 20,000 Italians in pitched battle at Adowa in 1896. It was the first time that Africans successfully defended themselves against the forces of a European imperialist nation, and it discouraged invasion of Ethiopia by the Italians (or other Europeans) for 40 years. Italy and Portugal, like the Congo Free State and Spain (which retained a few vestiges of former days), were able to enjoy sizable holdings in Africa because of mutual fears among the principal contenders. The principal contenders were Great Britain, France, and Germany. Each preferred to have territory held by a minor power rather than by one of its significant rivals.

The Germans were latecomers in the colonial race, which Bismarck entered with reluctance. By the 1880s all the usual imperialist arguments were heard in Germany, though most of them, such as the need for new markets, for emigration to overseas territories, or for the investment of capital, had little or no application in tropical Africa. The Germans established colonies in German East Africa and in the Cameroons and Togo on the west coast, along with a desert area that came to be called German Southwest Africa (where they ruthlessly suppressed the rebellious Herero people). It did not escape the notice of German imperial planners that someday the Congo and the Portuguese colonies might be joined with their colonies in a solid German belt across the African heartland. The French controlled most of West Africa, from Algeria across the Sahara and the Sudan to various points on the Guinea coast. They also occupied Obok on the Red Sea, and after the Italian defeat in 1896 their influence in Ethiopia grew. French planners therefore dreamed of a solid French belt across Africa from Dakar to the Gulf of Aden. The French government in 1898 dispatched Captain J. B. Marchand with a small party eastward from Lake Chad to hoist the tricolor far away on the upper Nile, in the southern part of the Sudan, which no European power as yet “effectively” occupied.

The two presumptive east-and-west belts, German and French, were cut (presumptively) by a north-and-south belt, projected in the British imperial imagination as an “Africa British from the Cape to Cairo.” From the Cape of Good Hope Cecil Rhodes pushed northward into what was later called Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). Kenya and Uganda in the mid-continent were already under British control. In Egypt, a British protectorate since 1882, the British began to support old Egyptian claims to the upper Nile. The first venture proved a disaster when in 1885 a British general popularly known as “Chinese Gordon” for previous military successes in China, leading an Egyptian force, was killed by Muslim troops at Khartoum. In the following decade British opinion turned imperialist in earnest. Another British officer, General Kitchener (with a young man named Winston Churchill under his command), again started southward up the Nile and defeated the local Muslims in 1898 at Omdurman. He then pushed on further upstream. At Fashoda he met Marchand.

The ensuing Fashoda crisis brought Britain and France to the verge of war. Already at odds over Egypt and Morocco, the two governments used the encounter at Fashoda to force a showdown. It was a test of strength, not only for their respective plans for all Africa but also for their relative position in all imperialist and international issues. Both at first refused to yield. The British virtually threatened to fight. The French, fearful of their insecurity against Germany in Europe, at last decided not to take the risk. They backed down and recalled Marchand from Fashoda. A wave of hatred for the British swept over France.

The British no sooner won this Pyrrhic victory than they became involved in a major conflict at the other end of the African continent. In 1890 Cecil Rhodes had become prime minister of the Cape Colony. He was a principal sponsor of the Cape-to-Cairo dream. Two small independent neighboring republics, the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, stood in his way. Their people were Afrikaners—descendants of the Dutch who had originally settled the Cape in the seventeenth century and, after 1815, when England annexed the Cape of Good Hope, had made the “great trek” to escape from British rule. The Boers, as the English called them (from the Dutch word for farmer), were simple, obstinate, and old-fashioned. They thought slavery not ungodly and disliked fortune hunters, footloose adventurers, mining-camp people, and other outsiders.

The discovery of diamonds and gold in the Transvaal brought the issue of outsiders to a head. British capital and British people poured in. The Transvaal refused to pass legislation needed by the mining corporations and their employees. In 1895 Rhodes, attempting to precipitate revolution in the Transvaal, sent a party of armed irregulars, under Dr. Jameson, a physician-turned-colonial administrator, over its borders. This Jameson Raid was a failure, but in Europe a great cry went up against British bullying of a small inoffensive republic. The German emperor, William II, dispatched a famous telegram to Paul Kruger, president of the Transvaal, congratulating him on his driving off the invaders “without having to call for the support of friendly powers,” that is, Germany. Three years later, in 1899, the British Empire went to war with the two small republics. The South African (or Boer) War lasted until 1902; the British sent in 300,000 troops, and to combat an elusive and irregular adversary they felt obliged to ravage the country and intern about 120,000 women and children in concentration camps, where about 20,000 died. But once subdued and brought within the British system the two republics were left with their self-governing institutions. In 1910 the Transvaal and the Orange Free State were combined with Cape Colony and Natal to form the Union of South Africa, which received semi-independent status along the lines of the Dominion of Canada.

The Fashoda crisis and the Boer War, coming in rapid succession, revealed to the British the bottomless depths of their unpopularity in Europe. All European governments and peoples were pro-Boer; only the United States, involved at the time in a similar military conquest of the Philippines, showed any sympathy for the British. The British, after the Boer War, began to rethink their international position, as will soon be seen.

As in the case of the Ottoman Empire, rivalry between the Great Powers over the spoils of Africa embittered international relations and helped prepare the way for the First World War. In Africa as a whole, there was little territorial change after the Boer War, although in 1911 Italy took Libya from the Turks. In 1914 the Germans were excluded from their short-lived empire. Had the Germans won the First World War, the map of Africa would probably have been greatly revised, but since they lost it, the only change was to assign the German colonies, under international mandate, to the French, British, and Belgians. With thischange, and except for Italy’s ephemeral conquest of Ethiopia in 1935, the political map of Africa remained what the brief years of partition had made it until the spectacular end of the European empires after the Second World War.

81. IMPERIALISM IN ASIA: THE DUTCH, THE BRITISH, AND THE RUSSIANS

The Dutch East Indies and British India

British India and the Dutch East Indies, in the half-century before the First World War, were the Europeans’ ideal colonies. They illustrated the kind of empire that all imperialists would have wished to have, and a glance at them suggests the goal toward which imperialism was moving and the system that it was trying to create.

Whereas all countries of western Europe showed a surplus of imports, receiving more goods from the rest of the world than they sent out, India and Indonesia invariably, year after year and decade after decade, showed a surplus of exports, sending out far more goods than they took in. This export surplus was the hallmark of the profitable colonial area, geared closely into the world market, with low purchasing power for the native population and kept going by foreign investment and management. Both regions, in addition, were so large as to have a good deal of internal business—commerce, insurance, banking, transportation—which never appeared in the statistics for world trade, but which, being dominated by Europeans, added immeasurably to their profits. Both had rich and varied natural resources, tropical in character, so that they never competed with the products of Europe—though India even before 1914 showed tendencies to industrialization. In both regions the people were adept and quick to learn. But they were divided by religion and language, so that, once conquered, they were relatively easy for Europeans to govern.

Neither region before the First World War had any self-government at the highest levels. Both were ruled by a civil service, honest and high-minded by its own lights, in which the most influential and best-paying positions were reserved for Europeans. Hence upper-class families in England and the Netherlands valued their empires as fields of opportunity for their sons—somewhat as they had formerly valued an established church. In both India and Indonesia the governments were more or less benevolent despotisms, which, by curbing warfare, plague, and famine, at least allowed the population to grow in numbers. Java, with 5 million people in 1815, had 48 million in 1942. India’s population in the same years grew from less than 200 million to almost 400 million. Finally, as the last virtue of a perfect colony, no foreign power directly challenged the British in India or the Dutch in their islands.

The Dutch in 1815 occupied little more than the island of Java itself. In the following decades the British moved into Singapore, the Malay peninsula, and north Borneo, and made claims to Sumatra. The French in the 1860s appeared in Indochina. The Germans in the 1880s annexed eastern New Guinea and the Marshall and Solomon islands. Ultimately it was the mutual jealousy of these three that preserved the Dutch position.

The Dutch took the initiative themselves. To forestall occupation by other Europeans, and to put down native pirates and find raw materials that the world demanded, the Dutch spread their rule over the whole 3,000-mile extent of the archipelago. They created an empire in place of the old chain of coastal trading posts and suppressed internal revolts in 1830,1849, and 1888; not till the twentieth century was northern Sumatra or the interior of Celebes brought under control. For some decades the Dutch exploited their huge empire by a kind of forced labor, the “culture system,” in which the authorities required farmers to deliver, as a kind of tax, stated amounts of stated crops, such as sugar or coffee. After 1870 a freer system was introduced. The Dutch also, as an important matter of policy, favored instruction in the Malay and Javanese languages, not in Dutch. This preserved the native cultures from westernizing disintegration but at the same time meant that Western ideas of nationalism and democracy entered more slowly.

In India in 1857, the British faced a dangerous rebellion, commonly called the Indian Mutiny, as if it had been a revolt of undisciplined soldiers only. The British army in India, with its “sepoys” (native Indian troops), was the only organization through which Indians could exert any collective pressure. The proportion of sepoys in the army was high in 1857 (about five-sixths) because British units had been withdrawn for the Crimean War and for action in China. Many Indians outside the army had been unhappy with British policies for decades. Rulers had been conquered and dethroned. Landowners had lost their property and been replaced by new ones more friendly to the British. Religious sentiments were inflamed. The British too obviously regarded Indian beliefs as repulsive; they had outlawed suttee, or widow burning, the ancient Hindu practice of a widow burning herself to death on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband; suppressed the Thugs, a small sect of holy assassins; and one British officer even declared that in ten years the government would abolish caste. Many Hindus therefore saw the British as dangerous opponents of their ancient religious traditions. Meanwhile, the Muslims were mobilized by Wahabi fundamentalism, a popular reform movement that sought to purify and defend the religious practices of Islam. Mysterious propaganda circulated over India. It infiltrated the sepoys, announcing to Muslim soldiers that certain newly issued cartridges were greased with the fat of a pig and to Hindus that the same cartridges were greased with the fat of a cow. Since for Hindus the cow was sacred, and for Muslims to touch pork was profane, much agitation was produced. The sepoys mutinied in the Ganges valley; and with them the other injured interests, including the fading Great Mogul and his court, rose against the British.

The British put down the rebellion with much brutality, aided by the fact that western and southern India took no part in it. But the uprising persuaded the British to a radically new course of policy, pursued basically until the end of the Indian empire almost a century later. The British East India Company and the Mogul empire were both finally and forever done away with. British authorities ruled directly, but the British concluded that they must rule India with and through the Indians themselves, not against them. This in practice meant a collaboration between the imperial power and the Indian upper classes. The British began to shelter Indian vested interests. They supported the Indian landlords and became more indulgent toward Indian “superstition.” Where before 1857, when they conquered an Indian state, they had simply abolished it and incorporated its territories, after the Mutiny they kept the remaining Indian states as protectorates. States existing in 1857, such as Hyderabad and Kashmir and over 200 others, with their galaxy of rajahs and maharajahs, carried on to the end of British rule in 1947. It was largely to provide a fitting summit for this mountain of Indian royalty that Queen Victoria was proclaimed empress of India in 1877.

India had been a considerable manufacturing country by preindustrial standards, Indian merchants had once been important throughout the Indian Ocean, and before 1800 Indian exports to Europe had included many textiles and other finished goods. The native crafts collapsed before modern industrialism reinforced by political power. “India,” observed a British expert in 1837, “can never again be a great manufacturing country, but by cultivating her connection with England she may be one of the greatest agricultural countries in the world.” Free trade (made possible by military superiority, usually overlooked by the economists) turned Britain into the world’s workshop and India into a supplier of raw materials. Indian exports in the latter part of the nineteenth century consisted increasingly of raw cotton, tea, jute, oilseeds, indigo, and wheat. The British shipped their manufactures in return. Business in India boomed; India came to have the densest railway network outside of Europe and North America. It is important to note, however, as a commentary on European trade with poor countries that Britain in 1914 did far more trading with the 6 million people of Australia and New Zealand than with the 315 million impoverished people of India.

The British, in contrast to the Dutch, decided in 1835 to favor instruction in English, not in the native languages. The historian T. B. Macaulay, one of the commission to make this recommendation, branded the Indian languages as vehicles of barbarous and unenlightened ideas—a bar to progress. The British also, after the Mutiny, admitted Indians to the civil service and to governors’ councils—sparingly indeed, but more than the Dutch in Indonesia. There were also many Indian businessmen. A class of westernized Indians grew up speaking perfect English and often were educated in England. They demanded more of a role in the affairs of their country. In 1885 the predominantly Hindu Indian National Congress was organized; in 1906, the All-India Muslim League. Muslim separatism, while favored by the British and sometimes even blamed upon them, was natural to India and exploited by some Indian leaders. Nationalism spread. It became increasingly anti-British; and radical nationalism turned also against the Indian princes, capitalists, and businessmen, as accomplices in imperialism, and so took on the color of socialism. In the period of the First World War, under nationalist pressure, the British granted more representation to Indians, especially in provincial affairs. But the movement toward self-rule was never fast enough to overcome the basic anti-British feeling of the Indian peoples, and Indian nationalism grew rapidly after the First World War.

Conflict of Russian and British Interests

While no outsider yet threatened the British in India, British statecraft discerned in the northern sky a large cloud which was clearly approaching. The Russian empire had occupied northern Asia since the seventeenth century. About 1850 Russian pressure on inner Asia resumed. It was a type of imperialism in which neither the demand for markets nor for raw materials, nor for the investment of capital, counted for much. In these matters Russia was itself semicolonial with respect to the West. The Russians had, like the Westerners, a sense of spreading their type of civilization; but Russian expansion was distinctively political in that most of the initiative came from the government. Russia was an icebound empire, craving warm-water ports. It was a landlocked empire, so that whichever way it turned it moved toward one ocean or another. The ocean was the domain of the Westerners, and in particular the British.

In the large picture, Russia pushed by land against the Ottoman Empire, Persia, India, and China, all of which the British (and others) reached by sea. In 1860, on the shores of the Sea of Japan, the Russians founded Vladivostok, the farthest-flung of all Slavic cities, whose name meant Lord of the East. But their advance in the mid-century was mainly in the arid and thinly settled regions of western Asia. The British had already fought two Afghan wars to keep Afghanistan as a no-man’s land between Russia and India. Contemporaries called the rivalry between Britain and Russia in Central Asia “the great game.” In 1864 the Russians took Tashkent in Turkestan. A decade later they touched India itself but were kept away by an Anglo-Russian agreement, which allotted a long tongue of land to Afghanistan and so separated British India and the Russian empire by 20 miles.

Russian advances in Turkestan, east of the Caspian, increased the pressure on Persia, which had long felt the same pressure west of the Caspian, where cities like Tiflis and Baku, now Russian, had once been Persian. If Tiflis and Turkestan could fall to the Russian empire, there was no reason why Persia should not do so next—except that Persia had a seacoast and so might also be available for occupancy by the British. In 1864 a British company completed the first Persian telegraph as part of the line from Europe to India. Other British investments and interests followed. Oil became important about 1900. In 1890, to bolster the Persian government against Russia, the British granted it a loan—taking the customs in Persian Gulf ports as collateral. In 1900 the Russian government granted the same favor, making its own loan to Persia, and appropriating as security all Persian customs except those of the Gulf. Clearly Persia was losing control of its own affairs, falling into zones, turning ripe for partition. A Persian nationalist revolution, directed against all foreigners and against the subservient government of the shah, broke out in 1905 and led to the assembly of the first parliament but hardly settled the question of Persian independence. In 1907 the British recognized a Russian “sphere of influence” in northern Persia; the Russians, a British sphere in the south (see map, pp. 664-665).

Imperial ambitions had deepened the hostility between Great Britain and Russia, with disputes over Persia and the Indian borderlands adding fuel to the quarrel they had long waged over the Ottoman Empire. We have seen how the struggle for Africa had at the same time estranged Britain from France and indeed from all Europe.

82. IMPERIALISM IN ASIA: CHINA AND THE WEST

China before Western Penetration

In this era of new imperial rivalries, the biggest bone of imperialist contention was China. On this bone every Great Power without exception tried to bite. The Manchu, or Qing (formerly transliterated, and still pronounced, as Ch’ing), dynasty (1644—1912) held a suzerainty over the whole area affected by Chinese civilization, from the mouth of the Amur River (as far north as Labrador) to Burma and Indochina (as far south as Panama), and from the ocean westward into Mongolia and Tibet. In the old Chinese view China was the Middle Kingdom, the civilized center of the world surrounded by less enlightened peoples. The Europeans were outlandish barbarians. A few had trickled through to China since the European Middle Ages. But the Chinese people persistently wanted nothing to do with them.

China was moving into an upheaval of its own even before Western influence became of any importance. For about 4,000 years the country had seen dynasties come and go in cycles. The Qing dynasty in the nineteenth century was clearly nearing its end. It was failing to preserve order or to curb extortion. About 1800 a White Lotus Society revolted and was suppressed. In 1813 a Heavenly Reason Society attempted to seize Peking (now Beijing). In the 1850s a Muslim rebellion set up a temporary independent state in the southwest. Greatest of all the upheavals was the Taiping Rebellion, which lasted for more than a decade (1850-1864) and in which as many as 20 million people are thought to have perished. Except that some fragmentary Christian ideas obtained from missionaries were expressed by some of the Taipings (and its leader claimed to be the younger brother of Jesus), the rebellion was due entirely to Chinese causes. The rebels attacked the Manchus, who had come from Manchuria two centuries before, as corrupt foreigners ruling over China. Their grievances were poverty, extortion, exorbitant rents, and absentee landlords, and their goal was to establish a new dynasty.

The Taipings set up a state in south China and their armies were at first disciplined, but the fighting lasted so long that both the Taiping leaders and the Manchu commanders sent against them got out of control, and much of the country sank into chronic banditry and disorder. It was in this period that China’s war lords, men controlling armed forces but obeying no government, appeared. The Manchus managed to put down organized Taiping resistance after 14 years, with some European assistance, led by the British General Gordon, the “Chinese Gordon” who later died at Khartoum. But it is clear that Chinese social conflict, agrarianism, and nationalism (the latter at first only anti-Manchu) antedated the impact of European imperialism.

Into this distracted China the Europeans began to penetrate about 1840. It became their policy to extort concessions from the Manchu empire but at the same time to defend the Qing dynasty against internal opposition, as was shown in the European response to the Taiping Rebellion. This was because they needed some kind of government in China with which they could make treaties, legalizing their claims and binding upon the whole country.

The Opening of China to the West

The modern phase of Chinese relations with the West was inauspiciously opened by the Opium War of 1839-1841. We have already observed how, though Europeans wanted Chinese products, the Chinese had no interest in buying European products in return. Trade therefore was difficult, and the British East India Company had for decades solved the problem of getting Chinese tea for Europe by shipping Indian-grown opium in return, since opium was one available commodity for which Chinese demand existed. When the Chinese government attempted to control the inflow of opium, the British government went to war. Fifteen years later, in 1857, Britain and France combined in a second war upon China to force the Chinese to receive their diplomats and deal with their traders. The Chinese continued to resist, whereupon 17,000 French and British soldiers entered Beijing and deliberately burned the emperor’s very extensive Summer Palace, an appalling act of vandalism from which soldiers brought back enough stolen cultural objects—vases, tapestries, porcelain, enamels, jades, wood carvings—to set a fashion in Europe and America for Chinese art.

From the first of these wars arose the treaty of Nanking (1842); from the second, the treaties of Tientsin (1857), whose terms were soon duplicated in still other treaties signed by China with other European powers and with the United States. The resulting complex of interlocking agreements imposed restrictions on China or conferred rights upon foreigners and came to be known as the “treaty system.” To the British in 1842 the Chinese ceded the island of Hong Kong outright and somewhat later granted adjoining territories on a long lease. They opened over a dozen cities, including Shanghai and Canton (now called Guangzhou), to Europeans as “treaty ports.” In these cities Europeans were allowed to make settlements of their own, immune to all Chinese law. Europeans traveling in the Chinese empire remained subject only to their own governments, and European and American gunboats began to police the Yangtse River. The Chinese likewise paid large war indemnities, though it was they themselves who suffered most of the damages. They agreed to levy no import duty over 5 percent and so became a free trade market for European products. To administer and collect the customs a staff of European experts was introduced. Money from the customs, collected with a new efficiency on a swelling volume of imports, went in part to the British and French in payment of the indemnities, but part remained with the Qing government, which, as noted, the Europeans had no desire to overthrow.

Annexations and Concessions

While China was thus permeated at the center by the extraterritorial and other insidious privileges for Europeans, whole blocks of its territory were cut away at the outer rim. The Russians moved down the Amur River, established their Maritime Province, and founded Vladivostok in 1860. The Japanese, now sufficiently westernized to behave like Europeans in such matters, in 1876 recognized the independence of Korea. The British annexed Burma in 1886. The French in 1883 assumed a protectorate over Annam despite Chinese protests; they soon combined five areas—Annam, Cochin China, Tonkin, Laos, and Cambodia—into French Indochina. (The first three were known also as Vietnam, a word not familiar in the West until after the Second World War.) These outlying territories had never, it is true, been integral parts of China proper; but it was with China that they had had their most important political and cultural relations and to the Chinese emperor that they had paid tribute.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1850-1906     
                                              
          Taiping Rebellion in China is suppressed by Qing Dynasty; up to 20 million die  
1856      Ottoman Empire launches reforms to modernize the legal and military system      
1857      "Indian Mutiny” threatens British control of India and leads to reforms in the imperial administration                                                         
1864      Napoleon III of France installs Austrian Archduke Maximilian as Emperor of Mexico                                                                          
1867      Maximilian is overthrown; Benito Juárez returns as Mexican President            
1876      Abdul Hamid takes power as sultan in Ottoman Empire; repressive regime lasts for 33 years                                                                    
1877-1878 Russo-Turkish War leads to Russian gains in the Balkans                         
1885      Berlin Conference sets European terms for imperial control of Africa            
1885      Hindu Indian National Congress is organized to challenge British power in India 
1894-1895 Japan goes to war with China and takes Formosa (later called Taiwan)            
1898      United States declares war on Spain and takes control of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines                                                                 
1898      French and English forces come to brink of imperial conflict at Fashoda in Sudan—the "Fashoda Crisis”                                                    
1899      Chinese revolt against European powers, the “Boxer Uprising,” is suppressed by European forces                                                                 
1899-1902 The Boer War enables Britain to consolidate power in South Africa               
1904-1905 Japan defeats Russia in Russo-Japanese War and expands into Manchuria           
1906      All-India Muslim League is organized to promote Indian nationalism and Muslim rights

Japan, whose modernization has been described, lost little time in developing an imperialistic urge. An expansionist party already looked to the Chinese mainland and to the south. Japanese imperialism first revealed itself to the rest of the world in 1894, when Japan went to war with China over disputes in Korea. The Japanese soon won, equipped as they were with modern weapons, training, and organization. They obliged the Chinese to sign the treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895, by which China ceded Formosa and the Liaotung peninsula to Japan and recognized Korea as an independent state. The Liaotung was a tongue of land reaching down from Manchuria to the sea; at its tip was Port Arthur. Manchuria was the northeastern part of China itself. This sudden Japanese triumph precipitated a crisis in east Asia. No one had realized how strong Japan had become. Europeans were astounded that a people who were not “European” in their culture or race should show such aptitude for modern war and diplomacy. It was to be supposed that Japan had designs on Manchuria.

It so happened that Russia, not long before, in 1891, had begun to build the Trans-Siberian Railway, whose eastern terminus was to be Vladivostok, the “Lord of the East.” Manchuria extended northward between central Siberia and Vladivostok. The Russians, whether or not they ever dominated Manchuria themselves, could not allow its domination by another Great Power. It happened also that Germany was at this time looking for a chance to enter the Far Eastern arena, and that France had formed an alliance with Russia, whose good will it was eager to retain. Russia, Germany, and France joined together in demanding that Japan give up the Liaotung peninsula. The Japanese hesitated; they were indignant, but they yielded. The Liaotung peninsula went back to China.

In China many alert people were humiliated at the defeat by the Japanese whom they had despised. The Chinese government, at last facing the inevitable, began madly to plan for a program of modernization and reform. Huge loans were obtained from Europe—the customs being pawned as security, following the pattern well established in Turkey, Persia, and Santo Domingo. But the European powers did not wish China to become consolidated too soon. Nor had they forgotten the sudden apparition of Japan. The result was a frantic scramble for further concessions in 1898.

It seemed in 1898 as if the Chinese empire in its turn would be partitioned. The Germans extorted a 99-year lease on Kiaochow Bay, plus exclusive rights in the Shantung peninsula. The Russians took a lease on the Liaotung peninsula from which they had just excluded Japan; they thus obtained Port Arthur and rights to build railroads in Manchuria to interlock with their Trans-Siberian system. The French took Kwangchow and the British Wei-hai-wei, in addition to confirming their sphere of influence in the Yangtse valley. The Italians demanded a share but were refused. The United States, fearing that all China might soon be parceled out into exclusive spheres, announced its policy of the Open Door. The idea of the Open Door was that China should remain territorially intact and independent and that powers having special concessions or spheres of influence should maintain the five percent Chinese tariff and allow businessmen of all nations to trade without discrimination. The British supported the Open Door as a means of discouraging actual annexations by Japan or Russia, which as the only Great Powers adjacent to China were the only ones that could dispatch real armies into its territory. The Open Door was a program not so much of leaving China to the Chinese as of assuring that all outsiders should find it literally “open.”

If readers will imagine what the United States would be like if foreign warships patrolled the Mississippi as far as St. Louis; if foreigners came and went throughout the country without being under its laws; if New York, New Orleans, and other cities contained foreign settlements outside its jurisdiction but in which all banking and management were concentrated; if foreigners determined the tariff policy, collected the proceeds, and remitted much of the money to their own governments; if the western part of the city of Washington had been burned (the Summer Palace), Long Island and California had been annexed to distant empires (Hong Kong and Indochina), and all New England was coveted by two immediate neighbors (Manchuria); if the national authorities were half in collusion with these foreigners and half victimized by them; and if large areas of the country were prey to bandits, guerrillas, and revolutionary secret societies conspiring against the helpless government and occasionally murdering some of the foreigners—then they can understand how observant Chinese felt at the end of the nineteenth century, and why the term “imperialism” came to be held by so many of the world’s peoples in abomination.

One Chinese secret society, its name somewhat literally translated as the Order of Literary Patriotic Harmonious Fists, dubbed the Boxers by hostile Westerners, broke out in insurrection in 1899. The Boxers pulled up railway tracks, fell upon Chinese Christians, besieged the foreign legations, and killed about 300 foreigners. The European powers, joined by Japan and the United States, sent a combined international force against the insurgents, who were put down. The victors imposed still more severe controls on the Chinese government and inflicted an indemnity of $330 million. Of this the United States received $24 million, of which, in 1924, it canceled the balance that was still due. On the other hand, as a consequence of the Boxer Uprising, the Qing officials strove desperately to strengthen themselves by modernizing the country. Meanwhile, as we shall see in a later chapter, a new revolutionary movement, aiming at expulsion of Manchus and foreigners alike, spread rapidly throughout China, especially in the south, under the leadership of Sun Yat-sen.

83. THE RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

Russia and Japan increasingly opposed each other’s intrigues in Manchuria and Korea. The Japanese felt a need for supplying their new factories with raw materials and markets on the Asian mainland, for employment for their modern army and navy and for recognized status as a Great Power in the Western sense. The Russian government needed an atmosphere of crisis and expansion to stifle criticism of tsarism at home; it could not abide the presence of a strong power directly on its East Asian frontier; it could use Manchuria and Korea to strengthen the exposed outpost of Vladivostok, which was somewhat squeezed against the sea and landlocked by Japanese waters. The Russians had obtained a concession from China to build the Chinese Eastern Railway to Vladivostok across the heart of Manchuria. A railway, in Manchuria, implied special zones, railway guards, mining and timber rights, and other auxiliary activities. The Japanese saw the fruits of their successful war of 1895 against China greedily enjoyed by their rival. In 1902 Japan signed a military alliance with Great Britain. We have seen how the British were alarmed by their diplomatic isolation after Fashoda and the Boer War and how for many years they had been expecting to have trouble with Russia. The Anglo-Japanese military alliance lasted 20 years.

War broke out in 1904, undeclared, by Japanese naval attack on Russian installations at Port Arthur. Both sides sent large armies into Manchuria. The decisive battle of Mukden (which was fought for control of the important Manchurian city now called Shenyang) engaged more troops than any previous battle in human history—624,000 men. Military observers were present from all the major powers, anxiously trying to learn what the next war in Europe would be like. The Russians sent their Baltic fleet around three continents to the Far East, but to the world’s amazement the Russian fleet was met and destroyed at Tsushima Strait by the new and untested navy of Japan. Russian communications by sea were thereby broken, and since the Trans-Siberian Railway was unfinished and since the Japanese also won the battle of Mukden, Russia was beaten.

At this point the president of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt, stepped upon the scene. With an outpost in the Philippines and a growing interest in China, it was to the American advantage to have neither side win too overwhelming a victory in the Far East. The most imperially minded of all American presidents offered his mediation, and plenipotentiaries of the two powers met at Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

By the treaty of Portsmouth in 1905, Japan recovered from Russia what it had won and lost in 1895, namely Port Arthur and the Liaotung peninsula; a preferred position in Manchuria, which remained nominally Chinese; and a protectorate in Korea, which remained nominally independent until it was annexed by Japan in 1910. Japan also received from Russia the southern half of the island of Sakhalin. Much of what Russia lost to Japan in 1905 was regained 40 years later at the end of the Second World War.

The Russo-Japanese War was the first war between Great Powers since 1870. It was the first war fought under conditions of developed industrialism. It was the first actual war between modern, westernized powers to be caused by competition in the exploitation of undeveloped countries. Most significant of all (except for the Ethiopian rout of the Italians in 1896), it was the first time that a nation of nonwhite people had defeated a nation of white people in modern times. Asians had shown that they could learn and play, in less than half a century, the geopolitical game of the Europeans.

The Japanese victory set off long chains of repercussions in at least three different directions. First, the Russian government, frustrated in its foreign policy in East Asia, shifted its attention back to Europe, where it resumed an active role in the affairs of the Balkans. This contributed to a series of international crises in Europe that led to the First World War. Second, the tsarist government was so weakened by the war, both in prestige and in actual military strength, and opinion in Russia was so disgusted at the clumsiness and incompetency with which the war had been handled, that the various underground movements were able to come to the surface, producing the Revolution of 1905. This in turn was a prelude to the great Russian Revolution of 1917, of which Soviet communism was the outcome. Third, news of Japan’s victory over Russia electrified those who heard of it throughout the non-European world. The fact that Japan was itself an imperialist power was overlooked in the excited realization that the Japanese were not a European power. Only half a century ago the Japanese, too, had been “backward”—defenseless, bombarded, and bulldozed by the Europeans.

The moral was clear. Everywhere leaders of subjugated peoples concluded, from the Japanese precedent, that they must bring Western science and industry to their own countries, but that they must do it, as the Japanese had done, by ending control by the Europeans, supervising the process of modernization themselves, and preserving their own native national character. New “hybrid elites” in colonized societies combined their growing knowledge of Western culture with a growing pride in their own cultures and traditions, thereby creating the new nationalisms that would become a major, worldwide legacy of modern European imperialism. Nationalist revolutions began in Persia in 1905; in Turkey in 1908; in China in 1911. In India and Indonesia many were stirred by the Japanese achievement. In the face of rising agitation, the British admitted an Indian to the Viceroy’s Council in 1909, and in 1916 the Dutch created a People’s Council, to include Indonesian members, in the Dutch East Indies. The self-assertion of Asians was to grow in intensity after the First World War.

The Japanese victory and Russian defeat can therefore be seen as steps in three mighty developments: the First World War, the Russian Revolution, and the Revolt of Asia. These three together put an end to Europe’s world supremacy and to confident ideas about the inevitable progress and expansion of European civilization; or at least they so transmuted them as to make the world of the twentieth century far different from that of the nineteenth.