Chapter 23

POSTCOLONIAL NATIONS IN ASIA AND LATIN AMERICA

114. The Emergence of Independent Nations in South Asia

115. The Emergence of Independent Nations in Southeast Asia

116. Changing Latin America

Of all the political changes in the history of the modern world, affecting hundreds of millions of people, nothing was more revolutionary, more dramatic, or perhaps more unexpected than the end of the European overseas colonial empires in the decades after the Second World War. In 1945 the British, the French, the Dutch, the Belgians, and the Portuguese still governed large parts of the world’s population, but within 30 years each of these colonial empires disappeared. Europe’s world supremacy came to an end.

The Second World War reinforced nationalist agitation for independence and freedom. It was difficult to wage war in the name of self-determination and democracy, often with the colonial countries as allies, without encouraging the idea of freedom among subject peoples. The Japanese conquests in Asia had also undermined the image of European invincibility. After the war the Europeans, economically exhausted, learned that they could rule only at prohibitive military cost and in embarrassing contradiction to their professed ideals of self-government.

In some instances the colonial powers, bowing to agitation for independence, liquidated their colonial holdings without armed struggle, as in the British withdrawal from the Indian subcontinent in 1947. Elsewhere the European powers withdrew only after protracted bloody wars, as in the case of the Dutch in Indonesia, the French in Indochina and Algeria, and the Portuguese in Angola and Mozambique. The United States also played a part in the transformation. It gave independence to the Philippines, granted Puerto Rico commonwealth status, took in Alaska and Hawaii as equal members of the federal union, and surrendered its privileges in the Panama Canal. The last prominent vestiges of the European empires in Asia ended when Britain surrendered Hong Kong to China in 1997 and Portugal transferred Macao to China in 1999. The second half of the twentieth century witnessed the largest liberation of colonial peoples and transfer of power in all history.


The end of the colonial empires and the emergence of over 100 new nations must count among the most far-reaching consequences of the two World Wars, and especially of the Second. But many of the new nations were nations only in a limited sense. They were now sovereign territorial entities, with definite boundaries, internationally recognized, with seats in the United Nations; but many of them lacked the internal coherence and shared experience of nations in the older sense of the word. Nor did nationhood for the most part carry with it democracy, civil rights, or the rule of law, nor alleviate deep-seated social and economic problems—even in Latin America (where most nations had already gained political independence in the nineteenth century).

The imperialist colonial experience left these regions of the world underdeveloped economically. In an uneven exchange they had depended on the industrial nations for capital, technology, and manufactures, while they in turn furnished the industrial countries with raw materials, foodstuffs, minerals, oil, and other primary commodities. With assistance from the industrially developed world, they now undertook modernization programs—against many obstacles and with mixed results. The winning of political independence in Asia and Africa, the mixed record of democratic self-government after independence, the effort to share in the earth’s advanced technology and financial riches, and the struggle to reconcile older cultural values with modernization all contributed to the saga of what came to be called the “developing world” in the years after 1945. The emergence of postcolonial nations was affected everywhere by the rapid growth of national populations; the legacy of colonial and regional wars; the struggle to develop modern, competitive economies; and the international conflicts of the Cold War. All of these postcolonial issues continued to affect Latin America as well as the newly independent nations in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, so that the nations of Latin America were usually included within that broadly defined list of peoples who constituted the “developing world.”

The so-called developing nations were also described in the Cold War era as the “Third World,” which became a widely used term to distinguish the less economically advanced regions or societies from the two “industrial” worlds: the American-led bloc of capitalist nations find the Soviet-led Communist bloc. In addition to this economic meaning, however, the term “Third World” frequently carried the political connotation of nonalignment in the Cold War. Many of the formerly colonized countries sought to remain uncommitted to either the American-led or Soviet-led alliances as they struggled to establish their own independent states and national cultures. Although this specific political meaning disappeared after the collapse of Soviet communism in 1991, the term “Third World” (in its economic sense) has persisted and may survive as a synonym for the poorer nations in the contemporary global economy.

The present chapter examines the history of the new Asian nations during their first half-century of modern independence and also discusses the post-1945 political and economic changes in Latin America. The Cold War rivalries of this era often affected the course of local political or economic conflicts on both of these continents. The following chapter looks at the history of postcolonial transformations in Africa and the Middle East (where the Cold War also had important consequences) and then returns to the broad problem of economic development that has affected postcolonial and impoverished nations in all parts of the world. The nations that emerged from the various colonial empires differed widely in their struggles for independence, in their later political systems, and in their cultural traditions, but they often faced similar postcolonial economic and political challenges as they sought to establish stable, modern nation-states.

114. THE EMERGENCE OF INDEPENDENT NATIONS IN SOUTH ASIA

The End of British Rule

The end in 1947 of British rule in India, the largest and most populous of all colonial areas ruled by Europeans, was epoch-making. Unfortunately, it fueled an explosion of ethnic and religious conflicts on the Indian subcontinent. The Indian National Congress, founded in 1885, had developed strength in the interwar years under the leadership of Gandhi and Nehru. The Congress party leaders demanded independence but also wished to avoid social revolution in the complex multiethnic country. Along with the British-trained Indian civil service, they considered themselves well prepared to govern an independent state. But the Muslim League, founded in 1906, claimed to speak, under Muhammad Ali Jinnah’s leadership, for millions of Muslims unwilling to live in an India dominated by the Hindus and the Congress party. The Muslims insisted on their own national state, rooted in Islam. The Congress leaders, in contrast, pressed for a unified, secular India, with religion separated from politics and with freedom of worship for all religions.

During the Second World War India supported the British, but at the same time the Congress party and the Muslim League stepped up a “quit India” campaign. To retain Indian support for the war effort and to counter Japanese anti-Western propaganda, the British pledged independence. At the war’s end, the British under Labour party leadership were poised to honor their pledge, but the Congress party and the Muslim League continued to have irreconcilable differences as plans were developed for an independent Indian state. To end the impasse the British decided on partition. In 1947 Britain granted independence to two nations: to India, predominantly Hindu, with a population of 350 million at the time, which became the Republic of India; and to Pakistan, mainly Muslim, with a population of 75 million, which became the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Large Muslim populations were concentrated in two widely separated regions of Britain’s former Indian empire, and Pakistan was established as a state with two disconnected parts, West and East Pakistan, separated by a thousand miles of Indian territory. About 60 million Muslims were also left in India, which helped keep India the multireligious secular state that Gandhi and Nehru desired. Ceylon (later renamed Sri Lanka) and Burma (later called Myanmar) in South Asia also received independence from Britain at this time.

The partition, overly hasty and ill-conceived, led immediately to violence and a vast social upheaval. Independence in August 1947 brought with it terrible communal riots between the Hindu and Muslim communities costing at least a million lives in a matter of weeks; some 17 million Hindus and Muslims were caught up in mass expulsions and turbulent migrations. In the worst of the tragedies, in the northern province of Punjab, Hindu and Sikh religious zealots ambushed and slaughtered trainloads of Muslim refugees fleeing west to Pakistan, and Muslim fanatics did the same to Hindus and Sikhs migrating east to India. Gandhi, while praying for civil peace, was himself assassinated in 1948 by a Hindu extremist protesting his program for religious toleration. Only after the uglier features of the communal warfare subsided could the tasks of governing begin.

With his Congress party dominant, Nehru governed India as prime minister from 1947 until his death in 1964, setting the country on the path of British-style parliamentary democracy and even a kind of Fabian socialism. With no effective opposition, Nehru’s program was more paternalistic than democratic. The masses looked to him to resolve the country’s enormous problems of poverty; rapidly growing population; and ethnic, religious, and linguistic diversity. In addition to Hindi and English, 16 other languages received official recognition. In economic matters Nehru, a moderate socialist, understood the need for private capitalist enterprise but believed that economic planning, government controls, and the nationalization of key industries were also necessary. Under his leadership a modern industrial India with a mixed economy began to take shape and in many ways grew impressively in the years that followed.

Meanwhile, India and Pakistan fell into a recurring pattern of conflict, centered in part on the former princely state of Kashmir (officially, Jammu and Kashmir) in the Himalayas. Although three-fourths of the population were Muslim, the Hindu maharajah after procrastinating opted to take Kashmir into India. Open fighting over the issue of Kashmir broke out between India and Pakistan in 1948, and tense relations and intermittent conflicts have continued ever since. War again broke out over Kashmir in 1965-1966, ending in an uneasy truce. In 1971 India went to war with Pakistan, but this time to support Bangladesh in its bloody war of secession from Pakistan.

In international affairs Nehru’s defense of neutralism and nonalignment in the Cold War, which he forcefully articulated at a milestone conference of emergent Asian and African nations in 1955 in Bandung, Indonesia, struck a responsive chord in many parts of the Third World. Although firmly committed to democracy, Nehru retained a deep antagonism toward Western imperialism and capitalism, which reinforced his neutralism in the Cold War. As to China, although Nehru championed the right of the People’s Republic of China to pursue its own path of social development, he condemned the Chinese occupation of Tibet and, as we have seen, actual hostilities broke out over border disputes between India and China in 1962.

Nebru's Successors

When Nehru’s immediate successor died in office in 1966, the Congress party leaders chose Nehru’s daughter Indira Gandhi to be prime minister. Gandhi was her name through marriage, not through any kinship to the famous founder of Indian nationalism. She turned out to be a strong-willed political leader in her own right, but subordinated some of her father’s more idealistic principles to political opportunism. More than Nehru, she looked for support from the masses, who idolized her for her carefully publicized pledges to abolish poverty. To win continuing support at the polls she made deals with Hindu nationalists, Muslims, and Sikhs. Corruption, already common, became even more fully entrenched.

In 1975 Gandhi, fearing losses in a coming election, proclaimed emergency rule, suspended constitutional government, and had hundreds of opponents arrested. This violation of basic democratic principles aroused strong opposition, and after close to two years an outraged parliament drove her from office. But Gandhi retained enough political support to return as prime minister in 1980 and to govern subsequently by constitutional means. Confronting a Sikh secessionist movement in the Punjab, she misguidedly sent army troops to invade their sacred Golden Temple at Amritsar. A few years later, in 1984, she was assassinated by Sikh soldiers of her own personal security guard.

The Congress party turned to her older son, Rajiv Gandhi, who had earlier shown little interest in politics. Governing not very effectively over the next five years, from 1984 to 1989, he seemed at times out of touch with the country’s pressing social problems. By now the long-entrenched Congress party was in decline, and in 1989 it lost its parliamentary majority.

The very concept of a tolerant secular India came under siege. A strong Hindu revivalist movement grew in strength during the 1990s, preaching “Hindu values” and pledging to restore India to a Hindu “golden age” antedating the Muslim conquests and British colonial rule. A right-wing political party, the Indian People’s party (the Bharatiya Janata, or BJP), used the movement for its own political ends, and through it Hindu revivalism entered the mainstream of Indian politics. The consequences were hostility, suspicion, and outright violence directed against the country’s now 120 million Muslims.

Successfully exploiting widespread dissatisfaction with the Congress party, the BJP continued to increase its strength. Nonetheless, when Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated at a campaign rally in 1991, a sympathetic backlash helped the Congress party to win the new elections.

For the next five years, from 1991 to 1996, the Congress party again held office, but the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty had come to an end. The veteran reform-minded party leader V. Narasimha Rao took steps to reform the party, reduce bureaucracy, and curb widespread corruption. Rao also relaxed the economic controls that had become obstacles to economic growth in a country that was now a major economic power, restoring several nationalized industries to private ownership. He encouraged foreign investment and reduced or eliminated excessive protectionist barriers. In the 1990s India began to emerge as a global leader in the development of new computer technologies, and the Indian economy became steadily more integrated into the worldwide system of transnational commerce.

While the economic results were impressive, the political scene grew more troubled. In December 1992 Hindu extremists clashed with Muslims over religious sites sacred to Islam, and riots erupted in major cities. The Congress Party, which was weakened by internal divisions and new corruption scandals, lost popular support and suffered a crushing electoral defeat in 1996. A series of unstable coalition governments followed until the Hindu revivalist party, the BJP, finally achieved a clear majority in 1999. The leader of the BJP, Atal Bhari Vajpayee, became Prime Minister and sought to enhance India’s global standing as both an economic and military power.

Fears of a radical nationalist domestic program gradually dissipated, however, and Vajpayee did not promote the more extreme agenda of activists in the BJP. Meanwhile, the Congress Party reorganized itself for parliamentary elections in 2004 and (somewhat surprisingly) was able to return to power. The new government had to cope with the catastrophic effects of a major tsunami in 2004, which killed thousands of people along the Indian coastline, and it faced the perennial issue of relations with Pakistan—which were slowly improving by 2005, even along the contested borders of Kashmir and even as both nations continued to develop nuclear weapons.

Although Nehru had worked for a non-nuclear India, his successors took a different path. In May 1974, after refusing to sign nonproliferation or comprehensive test ban treaties, India tested an underground nuclear device and became the world’s sixth nuclear nation. Two decades later, in 1998, Pakistan demonstrated its nuclear prowess by test detonating a nuclear bomb. India responded with nuclear tests of its own. Armed conflict between India and Pakistan thus took on the dimensions of a global danger, and the older dispute over Kashmir attracted worldwide attention in the early twenty-first century. Despite the welcome progress in Indian-Pakistani relations after 2004, South Asia remained one of the world’s threatening trouble spots and a site of continuing religious and nationalist clashes.

Fifty Years of Independence

In 1997 India celebrated 50 years of independence. After over a half-century India remained a land of many contradictions. It could boast of a large, well-educated, ambitious middle class benefiting from an increasingly modern economy. Although the traditional caste system was officially illegal, its effects persisted in many places, and particularly outside the larger cities. But many born into the lower castes had moved into the mainstream of the business and professional world. In 1997 India elected its first president born an “untouchable,” President V. R. Narayan.

Through medical advances, better nutrition, and a decline in infant mortality, death rates had declined and population almost tripled in the first 50 years, reaching more than 1 billion by the early twenty-first century. But economic growth and rising consumer standards for some classes hardly affected village India—where most of the population still lived. Poverty, illiteracy, disease, and malnutrition remained widespread. Over half the country was illiterate; for women and girls the number was higher and they labored under additional disadvantages as well. Over 200 million people were without safe drinking water and 650 million were without basic sanitation. Population growth continued to threaten economic advances. A sporadic but ineffective family planning program was still widely resisted. Although poverty had declined in the past 50 years, over 40 percent of the population remained impoverished by internationally accepted standards. The cities were congested and slum-ridden, swollen by millions who had left the villages to find jobs. India, despite its economic and technological advances, remained a Third World country, divided into social groups with very different levels of education, wealth, and access to the products of the global economy.

Much remained to be done to improve the status of women. Old forms of discrimination persisted, accompanied at times by outright violence in matters of dowries, divorce, and inheritance, and in the plight of widows who were thrown on the mercy of their husbands’ families for survival. The highly visible presence of women in high political ranks in India and elsewhere in South Asia belied their lower status in general. In India, as in Pakistan, Burma, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, the Philippines, and elsewhere, women became presidents, prime ministers, or opposition leaders; but they almost always came to office as daughters or widows in leading political families similar to the Nehru-Gandhi “dynasty.”

The Congress party, in power for most of the years since independence, had undoubtedly provided the stability needed for survival of the diverse country as a united nation. Parliamentary democracy, the rule of law, a free press, and an effective judiciary prevailed; and by the end of the twentieth century over 600 million people were exercising their right to vote (on ballots still marked by party symbols because of the widespread illiteracy). Yet bribery, venality, and corruption continued to affect all levels of government and the country’s “invisible majority”—its needy millions—remained neglected. Nehru’s appeal at the time of independence for India’s “tryst with destiny” had to be postponed. And the enduring problem of ethnic and religious tensions, which continued to disrupt Indian society in the early twenty-first century, often threatened to undermine India’s democracy and destroy the multireligious tolerance that India’s founders had originally envisaged.

The Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Pakistan’s independence leader, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, a British-educated lawyer, was by no means an Islamic extremist and might have made a significant difference in the country’s history, but he died shortly after independence, and his successor was assassinated. Despite the machinery of parliamentary democracy, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan soon succumbed to military rule and over the years oscillated between periods of military rule, restoration of constitutional government, which generally meant civilian misrule, and the return of military dictatorship. By the end of the century military dictators had run the country for half of its years of independence. It remained predominantly agricultural, and was still one of Asia’s poorest and least developed nations.

The awkward postcolonial arrangement for uniting the widely separated Muslim populations of South Asia in a single nation collapsed in violence. In East Pakistan, which had been carved out of the old Indian state of Bengal during the hasty partition in 1947, most of the population lived in congested, impoverished conditions that fueled political and social resentments against the West Pakistani leaders who dominated the government of Pakistan. These resentments exploded into a war of secession in 1971, when East Pakistan proclaimed its independence as the new state of Bangladesh (or “Bengali nation”). The Pakistani government vehemently opposed the secession movement and dispatched a large army to suppress the rebellion; hundreds of thousands were killed in a brutal and unequal civil war. At that point, however, India massively intervened with military force and compelled the recognition of independence. Bangladesh became one of the world’s most populous, predominantly Muslim nations (the population would grow to about 145 million by 2005), but its high population density contributed to persistent economic problems. It remained one of the world’s poorest nations, suffering from floods, drought, and famine as well as recurring cycles of political violence and military coups.

Civilian rule was restored in Pakistan for a short time after the war over Bangladesh, but in 1977 the now familiar Pakistani political pattern continued. The military took power and executed President Ali Bhutto. Even when civilian rule was restored, the army kept a watchful eye on the political scene. In 1988 Benazir Bhutto, the Western-educated daughter of the former president, returned from exile and in new elections became the first woman prime minister of a major Islamic nation. Promising liberalization and reform, she provoked opposition from militant Muslim groups and members of the military, who used evidence of corruption to discredit her leadership and eventually force her from office. Meanwhile the Islamic religious movements grew larger and more militant, bolstered by Muslim refugees and guerrilla fighters fleeing Afghanistan after the Soviet Union invaded that country in 1979. Muslim extremism continued to grow, and by the early 1990s the government ruled that Islamic law should take precedence over the constitution.

When the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979, Pakistan was caught up in the contest between the superpowers in the Cold War. The United States used Pakistan as a conduit for arms being shipped to the Muslim guerrillas fighting the Soviets, and over 2 million Afghan refugees fled to Pakistan—where they remained until the Soviet army withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989 (and where many returned during later conflicts in the 1990s). The rise of a radical Islamic Afghan regime, the Taliban, contributed to the further development of militant Islamic movements within Pakistan; and the Pakistani government became one of the only governments in the world to establish relations with the Taliban regime.

In 1997 Benazir Bhutto’s successor and chief opponent so thoroughly undermined the authority of parliament, the judiciary, and the provincial legislatures that the country was in political disarray and in financial straits. Relations with India, as we have seen, deteriorated. The military suffered a humiliating defeat when it crossed the border into Indian territory in Kashmir in 1999.

Later that year, as economic matters worsened and renewed political instability threatened, the army leader General Musharraf staged a military coup. The new government included a number of civilian leaders and promised future elections. The coup was not unpopular because the Pakistani people were desperate for change, but the nation’s political record of military rule aroused skepticism about the return to civilian government, let alone to parliamentary democracy.

Musharraf’s military regime faced widespread popular opposition after 2001, when Pakistan entered a new era of cooperation with the United States. Following the terrorist attack on the United States by Islamic extremists in September 2001, Musharraf supported the American military campaign that overthrew the Taliban regime which had sheltered the A1 Qaeda terrorist organizers of the attacks against America. Although his cooperation with the United States gave Musharraf a prominent new role in international affairs and new sources of foreign support, he faced continuing criticism from Islamic militants, some of whom tried twice to assassinate him. Other Pakistanis resented his unconstitutional hold on the presidency without new elections. The radicals were also unhappy with his efforts to improve relations with India.

The gradual improvement in relations between India and Pakistan offered some promise for a more stable political future in South Asia. At the same time, however, the uncertain future of Pakistan’s military government, the presence of foreign Islamic radicals within Pakistani society, the development of nuclear weapons, and the continuing militancy of both Islamic and Hindu radicals all pointed to the danger and likelihood of more upheavals or religious conflicts in South Asia. And the lingering violence in Afghanistan after the overthrow of the Taliban regime gave Pakistan a pivotal (though unpredictable) role in the global political and military strategies of the United States.

115. THE EMERGENCE OF INDEPENDENT NATIONS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

The Union of Burma (Myanmar)

Burma, India’s neighbor to the east, embarked on a unique path of isolation and repression after it gained independence in 1948. Britain had annexed the country to its Indian empire in 1885; and gradually, over the next half century, the British built a railway network, developed the country’s mining and forest resources, and encouraged rice cultivation. Burma became for a time the world’s largest exporter of rice. In the interwar years the British encouraged limited self-government but also imprisoned nationalist leaders like Aung San who pressed for immediate independence. After the Japanese invasion of Burma in the Second World War the nationalist leaders took up arms against the Japanese but also took advantage of the Japanese conquest to advance Burma’s independence from Britain.

After the war the British recognized Burma’s independence, but Aung San, who was to become prime minister, was assassinated and his associate, U Nu, a devout Buddhist and somewhat doctrinaire socialist, became the first prime minister. To the new leaders of the nation anti-imperialism meant anticapitalism and the new government was determined to socialize the country rapidly. With little money, however, it was difficult to import machinery and to train workers; “the Burmese path to socialism,” as it was styled, became impossible. In addition to economic chaos, Burma faced armed rebellion from insurgent separatist minorities, many of them reinforced after 1949 by the new Communist regime in China. Ethnic minorities made up about one-third of the country’s population. Many of these minorities were incensed by Nu’s plan to make Buddhism the official state religion.

Despite the official political framework of a multiparty parliamentary democracy, the military exercised a parallel power with the civilian authorities. As the ethnic insurgencies became more threatening in 1962, the army head General Ne Win staged a military takeover. He would retain power for the next 26 years in a one-party state still dedicated to pursuing the “Burmese path to socialism,” but in effect a military regime.

As economic difficulties and ethnic turbulence steadily worsened, the country retreated into deeper isolation. By the early 1970s insurgent groups controlled one-third of the country. Popular discontent mounted and in the 1980s a new opposition party emerged, the National League for Democracy, headed by Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of the country’s martyred founder. Educated in India, she also spent some 20 years at Oxford where she pursued graduate studies and married an Oxford don. An immensely popular and charismatic figure, she incorporated in her person the nonviolence of traditional Buddhism with Western democratic values. When in 1988 the military dictator resigned, she addressed large crowds of supporters and proclaimed that Burma’s “second struggle for independence” was under way. But in the end a repressive military junta took power and placed her under house arrest. During this same period, in 1989, the military government emphasized its break from the country’s previous colonial and national history by changing the nation’s name to Myanmar.

Confronted with continuing massive demonstrations, the military agreed to open elections in 1990, the first in 30 years. But when the democratic opposition won 90 percent of the popular vote and over four-fifths of the parliamentary seats, the stunned military declared the elections null and void and took reprisals against the party leaders. Aung San Suu Kyi remained under strict surveillance, her movements and visitors severely restricted. But she became an international symbol of democratic aspirations; in 1991 she received the Nobel Peace Prize. Meanwhile military repression thwarted the popular desire for democratic self-government and civilian rule, and the leaders of the democracy movement remained virtually imprisoned throughout much of the 1990s and into the first decade of the new century. Although international human rights groups protested the regime’s repressive policies and helped some refugees escape the country, the military maintained tight control over all aspects of political and public life in Myanmar. The movement for democratic reforms, represented by the determined leadership of Aung San Suu Kyi, was still unable to achieve its political goals almost 60 years after the nation had gained its independence from Britain.

Malaysia

In the Malayan peninsula British plans for independence after the Second World War were delayed because of tensions between the country’s Muslim Malay majority and its sizable Chinese and Indian minorities. These large minority populations had lived in Malaysia since the nineteenth century when the British had imported workers from China and India to work in the tin and rubber mines. The Chinese had come to play a dominant role in the economy. At the same time a militant Communist movement had emerged, and the British for several years fought a Communist insurgency. In 1957, with the rebellion mostly subdued, Britain granted independence. Five years later Malaya joined with Singapore and other former British dependencies to create the Federation of Malaysia.

Singapore withdrew in 1965 to become a small island-nation with a flourishing modern economy and high living standards but governed by a semi-authoritarian, paternalistic regime under Lee Kuan Yew. Singapore thus resembled other East Asian countries such as Taiwan and South Korea in making rapid economic advances without establishing full-fledged democracies. There was no absolute repression, but no genuine democracy either. Under more or less authoritarian regimes, the ruler or ruling group brought all political parties under the umbrella of “national unity” and discouraged militant opposition or open dissent. Not until late in the twentieth century did democracy make headway in Taiwan and South Korea. Political life in Singapore also began to evolve, though Lee Kuan Yew remained a guiding force in government affairs and his son became prime minister in 2004.

Ethnic conflicts had flared up in Malaysia in 1969, and riots led to the suppression of parliamentary rule for about two years. After that difficult period, although the Malay political dominance remained clear, multiethnic coalitions gradually helped to ease tensions. Already prospering because of tin, oil, rubber, and lumber resources, Malaysia in the 1980s developed new high-technology industries, and its economy became one of the fastest growing in Asia, attracting foreign investment as well. The long-serving Prime Minister, Mahathir bin Mohamad, promoted an ambitious economic program that included large-scale construction projects.

Malaysia had climbed out of its previous “Third World” economic status by the late 1990s, but a series of financial and currency crises weakened the nation’s financial position at the end of the century. Radical Islamic groups became active among the nation’s large Muslim population, and the economic problems led to the expulsion of numerous foreign workers. But Malaysia remained one of the most prosperous and stable Asian nations to emerge from the twentieth-century British empire.

The British thus surrendered all but small outposts of their vast empire within a decade or so after the end of the Second World War. However, most of the former British colonies in Asia (as well as in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific) agreed to retain a voluntary association with Britain and each other in a new Commonwealth of Nations. Both Malaysia and Singapore, for example, became members of this Commonwealth, which grew into an association of over 50 independent nations. The Commonwealth did not force its members to act in concert on international issues, but it helped to promote useful interchange between the diverse peoples who had once lived within Britain’s far-flung empire.

Indonesia

Another great empire in Southeast Asia, the Dutch East Indies, also came to an end. Agitation for independence, as in India, went back to pre-1914 days, but the Indonesian Nationalist party, founded in 1927, and a growing Communist party had met with little success in the interwar years. The Japanese, as elsewhere in Asia, exploited anti-Western sentiment during the Second World War and found Indonesian nationalist leaders to use as collaborators in their military occupation. At the same time a broad resistance movement emerged in which the Communists played a major part. Once the Japanese were ousted at the war’s end in August 1945, before the Dutch could return, the Indonesian Nationalist leader Sukarno (Indonesians often use only their family name in public life) proclaimed the country’s independence. For four years the Dutch stubbornly fought the nationalist movement, but they finally ceded independence in 1949.

By the early twenty-first century Indonesia’s population exceeded 240 million, making it the fourth most populous country in the world. An archipelago situated along the equator with thousands of islands strung together over 3,000 miles, it is rich in oil, natural gas, timber, and other resources. A modified form of Malay is the official language, but the people of Indonesia speak over 300 languages and dialects. With some 88 percent of the population Muslim, it has the largest Islamic population in the world. The first and continuing task was to establish and maintain a sense of national identity in so large and multiethnic a country.

Sukarno began with a parliamentary constitutional program and a democratic ideology derived from the struggle against the Dutch, but the democratic phase did not last. In 1959 he dissolved the Constituent Assembly and governed in the following years under a populist dictatorship that he called “guided democracy”; before long he insisted upon being elected “president for life,” and he sought to play a prominent, independent role in Cold War diplomacy.

Sukarno became one of the chief spokesmen for the developing nations of Asia and Africa. He hosted the meeting in Bandung in 1955 at which leaders of 29 of the new nations celebrated their new sovereignty, condemned Western imperialist and capitalist exploitation, and pledged neutralism and nonalignment in the Cold War. Sukarno cultivated friendship with the Soviet Union and Communist China and loosened economic ties with the West. Meanwhile the Indonesian Communist party, backed by the People’s Republic of China, had quietly grown into the third largest Communist party in the world with some 2 million members.

For a time Sukarno managed to work with and control the large Communist party, but in 1965 leftist army officers attempted a coup. A relatively unknown army leader, General Suharto, quickly moved to suppress what was alleged to be a Communist rebellion, but he also ousted Sukarno. What ensued, as the army stood by, was the dreadful slaughter by Islamic militants of hundreds of thousands of Communists and leftists in a bloodbath that ranks among the larger atrocities of the twentieth century. A half million Communists and leftist suspects were murdered, 2 million were arrested and thousands were imprisoned. The violence also took a racial turn when many ethnic Chinese fell victim. The repression destroyed the Indonesian Communist party.

Over the next 32 years General Suharto retained power, running his island empire from the capital in Jakarta under a system of controlled elections in which he was dutifully reelected president every five years. He was supported within the country and abroad by those who claimed that his authoritarian methods were needed to maintain Indonesian unity and to prevent the resurgence of Communism or the spread of Islamic extremism. The military presence, which had loomed in Indonesian politics ever since independence, became pervasive. A single governing party ruled with uncontested power.

Suharto’s anti-Communist credentials brought him Western support in the Cold War and attracted foreign investment to the country. He presided over an impressive economy, which showed annual growth rates that became another of the success stories of the developing world. The economy expanded sixfold over 30 years, and Indonesia ranked as one of the ten strongest emerging markets of the world. New construction changed the face of the nation, especially of the capital. A few in Indonesia became very rich; the middle classes grew in number and comfort; and there was a general decline in poverty throughout the country.

At the same time a culture of corruption grew. Suharto, his family, his political entourage, and an inner circle of bankers, business leaders, and technocrats enriched themselves to the growing resentment of people outside the ruling elite. Suharto aroused opposition in other ways. In 1975, when Portugal withdrew from East Timor, an enclave it had long ruled adjacent to Indonesian territory, Suharto moved aggressively to annex it. The population of almost 1 million, many of whom were Christian, wanted independence and resisted the brutal annexation. Close to 100,000 lives were lost in a violent, systematic repression that provoked worldwide denunciation of Suharto. Indonesia continued to suppress the movement for East Timor’s independence until the end of the twentieth century, when the United Nations sent peacekeeping troops and safeguarded a political process that finally established the independent nation of East Timor in 2002.

Much of Indonesia’s economic success depended on foreign loans, and its foreign debt mounted, but the overexpansion of credit threatened the country’s financial stability. In the latter half of 1997 a financial panic swept Indonesia (and other parts of southeast Asia as well). In 1997-1998 the currency lost four-fifths of its value and the poverty rate tripled.

The economic crisis brought about Suharto’s downfall. When he insisted on reelection for a seventh term as president and the servile parliament permitted it, riots and demonstrations broke out. Suharto was forced to relinquish power in May 1998, naming as his successor his vice president and protege H. J. Habibie. The country was in economic chaos but also in political ferment. The press was freed, political parties reemerged, new elections were organized, and a new president, Abdurrahman Wahid, took office in 1999. As a concession to the opposition, Megawati Sukarnoputri, the daughter of the country’s independence leader and first president (Sukarno), became vice president. Two years later she succeeded Wahid when the legislature removed him from office. President Megawati brought new stability to the Indonesian government and the economy began to revive. Extremist Islamic groups sometimes resorted to terrorism, however, and there were repeated military clashes with rebels who were seeking autonomy or independence for the provinces of Aceh and Papua. Following a pattern that appeared in many parts of the world, the advocates of religious or regional identities challenged the economic and political policies of a government that was seeking to integrate the nation into global economic and political institutions.

Mounting political unrest led in 2004 to the election of the first directly elected Indonesian president—a political innovation that exemplified the continuing development of Indonesian democracy. But the new government faced ongoing economic and domestic political challenges as well as the aftereffects of the catastrophic tsunami that struck southeast Asia in December 2004. Indonesia was a rapidly growing and evolving large nation of pivotal importance in Asian affairs and in the global resurgence of Muslim religious identities.

The Independence Movement in Indochina

The French colonial empire also fell apart, not, however, without a long struggle. The first of France’s postwar colonial wars, as noted in the previous chapter, was fought over Indochina. When France offered autonomy to the states of Indochina at the end of the Second World War within a French federation, Cambodia and Laos accepted; but Vietnam (as Cochin-China, Tonkin, and Annam jointly came to be called) demanded full independence. Open warfare broke out in 1946, and French armies and Communist-led Vietnamese forces fought each other for over seven years.

The Communist leader Ho Chi Minh, who headed the independence movement in Vietnam, had spent many earlier years in London, in Paris (where he had first called for the “self-determination” of Indochina during the Versailles peace conference and witnessed the founding of the French Communist party in 1920), and in Moscow. He returned to Vietnam in 1941, organized a Vietnamese independence movement (the Viet Minh), and mobilized guerrilla armies to fight the Japanese. At the war’s end he proclaimed Vietnam’s independence. The French tried to reassert control by using an ineffectual former emperor of Annam as a puppet. When negotiations failed, Ho turned his armies against the French. Because the Communists led the independence movement, the French could claim that they were fighting to stem the tide of world communism, not to preserve nineteenth-century colonial privileges. Yet communism here, as often in Asia, was linked to nationalism, anticolonialism, anti-Westernism , and genuine popular discontent.

Under President Eisenhower the United States, anticolonial but ready to champion anti-Communist causes in the Cold War, aided the French financially but refrained from open military intervention. The war drained French morale and resources. In the spring of 1954 at the very time that an international conference was meeting in Geneva to arrange a settlement in Indochina, the French army after a long, costly siege suffered a severe defeat at the battle of Dien Bien Phu. The conference, with French acquiescence, recognized the independence of Vietnam, as well as of Cambodia and Laos. The colonial empire in French Indochina came to an end.

Vietnam was provisionally partitioned at the 17th parallel into a northern and southern sector until elections could be held for the entire country, but the elections never took place. Neither Ho nor the Western-backed regime in the south was satisfied with the settlement of 1954, and a civil war of increasing intensity soon began. The United States, as we shall see, became deeply involved in the war by the early 1960s, seeing the struggle in Vietnam as part of the global Communist challenge that had to be contained. The Vietnam War became one of the most protracted conflicts of the entire Cold War era, and we shall return to this war when we examine the broader context of American-Soviet confrontations after 1960 in Chapter 25. Meanwhile, by the mid-1950s, France’s entire colonial empire in Indochina had given way to new national states.

The Americans and the Philippines

The Americans, too, shared in the liquidation of colonial empires in Asia. In the Philippines a strong independence movement had emerged in the late nineteenth century directed against the decaying Spanish empire. Revolution under the leadership of Emilio Aguinaldo was well under way when the Spanish-American War broke out in 1898. With American encouragement Aguinaldo joined the war against Spain and unilaterally declared independence, promulgating the first democratic and republican constitution in Asia. But Filipino nationalists were stymied when Spain transferred the islands to the United States at the end of the war. Aguinaldo and his followers rebelled and took up arms against the United States. The suppression of the Filipino independence movement over the next three years cost the United States more money and more lives than the war against Spain itself.

Independence remained a pressing issue both in the islands and in the United States, which after semimilitary rule in the 1920s proposed a transition to self-rule and eventual independence. An act of Congress in 1934 granted self-governing commonwealth status with a pledge of full independence in the near future. Delayed by the Second World War, independence was finally granted in July 1946.

In the early years of independence a succession of governments did little to help the impoverished peasants or even maintain political order. Communist-led guerrilla movements pressing for land redistribution added to instability. President Ferdinand E. Marcos, who was elected in 1965, declared martial law in 1972 and ruled the nation as an authoritarian dictator until the 1980s. The Americans cooperated with the Marcos regime because of its staunch anticommunism, but poverty and government corruption steadily increased while Marcos and his family grew wealthy and spent money extravagantly.

After the assassination in 1983 of the popular opposition leader Benigno Aquino upon his return to the islands from exile, his widow Coraz6n Aquino spearheaded the opposition and contested Marcos in presidential elections that finally took place in 1986. When Marcos, despite clear evidence of fraud, attempted to declare himself the winner, the country turned decisively against him, and his support eroded even in the United States. The ensuing popular upheaval forced him into exile.

President Aquino faced continuing pressures from Right and Left, but restored democratic elections and civil rights. She also slowly inaugurated land and other reforms, setting an example for those who followed her. In the early 1990s the Filipino legislature opposed the renewal of leases for America’s military bases, and the United States agreed to withdraw. Another chapter of Western imperialism came to an end. Later governments struggled to develop the Filipino economy, to suppress Muslim secessionist groups in the southern islands, and to overcome persistent charges of corruption and electoral fraud. The Supreme Court forced a later president from office in 2001 because of a corruption scandal; and his successor, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, would also arouse widespread suspicion of fraudulent electoral practices. Filipino political life remained unsettled as successive governments lost the confidence of the nation’s political elites as well as of the general population.

The transition from colonialism to postcolonial political and social systems posed complex historical challenges throughout South Asia and Southeast Asia, even after more than a half-century of constant political and economic change. People in all Asian societies had welcomed national independence and celebrated the demise of the Western empires, but the struggles for independence gave way everywhere to new struggles for political stability, democratic institutions, economic development, and national unity. The complex domestic evolution of every newly independent nation-state was further complicated by the international conflicts of the Cold War and by the global pressures of a world economy that often affected the postcolonial nations even more profoundly after they had gained their political freedom from the European imperial systems. More generally, the transition to independence stimulated ongoing debates about cultural, religious, and national identities that were still creating new political movements and conflicts within every postcolonial Asian society in the early twenty-first century.

116. CHANGING LATIN AMERICA

Unlike the new nations that emerged after the Second World War in Asia, most of the Latin American nations had been independent for well over a century by 1945. Yet the legacy of colonialism had left the region, like other parts of the Third World, with unbalanced economic development, heavily dependent on the outside world, and burdened with unresolved political, social, and economic problems.

A region of over 7 million square miles stretching from the Rio Grande to the southern tip of Argentina and Chile, Latin America includes Mexico, Central America, South America, and the islands of the Caribbean. It is mainly Spanish in language and culture, but Portuguese is the language of Brazil, the continent’s largest and most populous country. English and French are spoken in some islands of the Caribbean, and a variant of French is spoken in Haiti. The many indigenous Indian languages and dialects, though still widely used in many rural areas, are generally submerged in the majority cultures; but the indigenous peoples have also reasserted or defended their cultural identities in many parts of Latin America during recent decades.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1946-2000

              The United States grants independence to the Philippines
1947          Britain ends its imperial rule in South Asia, partitioning the region into the two new nations of India and Pakistan
1949          Indonesia wins independence from the Netherlands
1954          France withdraws from Indochina; two governments emerge in North and South Vietnam
1955          Leaders of 29 “new nations" meet in Bandung, Indonesia, and affirm “nonalignment” in the Cold War
1959-1961     Fidel Castro establishes Communist government in Cuba
1965          General Suharto overthrows Sukarno; begins 32-year rule in Indonesia
1970-1973     Leftist government in Chile; overthrown by coup and Pinochet dictatorship
1971          India helps Bangladesh gain independence from Pakistan
1974          India develops nuclear weapons
1976-1983     Dictatorship in Argentina represses leftist opposition
1979          Soviet Union invades Afghanistan and begins war with Muslim guerillas
1989          Soviets withdraw from Afghanistan; radical Muslim (Taliban) government follows
1989          Military rulers in Burma repress dissent; nation is renamed Myanmar
1994          Mexican-U.S.-Canadian Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) goes into effect
1996-1999     Rising power of Indian People’s Party (BJP) fosters Hindu-based nationalism in India
1998          Pakistan detonates a nuclear bomb
1998          General Suharto is ousted from power in Indonesia
1998          Hugo Chavez becomes president of leftist government in Venezuela
2000          Vincente Fox is elected president of Mexico; ends 71 years of rule by Institutional Revolutionary Party (PR1)

It is a region of great racial diversity and mixture. Argentina, because of the flood of immigration in the nineteenth century, is overwhelmingly European in composition, but in Bolivia over half the population is of indigenous Indian origin. In Brazil, the population consists of whites of European background, indigenous Indians, blacks, and mainly an amalgam of mixed peoples. Because of the once flourishing slave trade and slavery, half the Brazilian population is wholly or in part of West African ancestry. Almost everywhere, however, European whites and mestizos (that is, people of mixed European and Indian ancestry) tend to dominate their societies. With high growth rates, the population of Latin America more than tripled after 1945, increasing from 160 million in 1950 to over 500 million by the end of the century. The two largest cities in Latin America, Mexico City and Sao Paulo, Brazil, were among the ten most populous urban agglomerations in the world at the beginning of the twenty-first century.

The Colonial Experience and the Wars for Independence

The three centuries of colonial rule after the Spanish conquista left an ineradicable mark. Wherever the Spanish had found large Indian populations, as in Mexico and in the area then known as Peru, they had incorporated them into their colonial system and imposed upon them the hierarchical social structure of the home country. To encourage settlement the crown had granted (or “entrusted”) large estates to Spanish nobles sent out from Spain to the New World.

The arrival of the Europeans had led in many places to demographic disaster. In the first generation the new diseases brought by the Europeans decimated the indigenous Indian populations. To work on the sugar plantations in the lowland areas in South America and throughout the Caribbean, the Europeans imported black slave laborers from Africa, eventually in the millions. Slavery was nominally abolished in most areas by the 1850s (although in Brazil not until 1888), but more or less disguised forms of servitude, like peonage, persisted. Indians and blacks remained at the bottom economic rung of a social system that was dominated by the American-born descendants of European settlers and immigrants—the Creoles.

A long-enduring pattern of economic exchange developed during the colonial period. Mineral wealth and other commodities flowed from the colonies to the mother country, and Spain in turn provided the needed finished goods or arranged for their shipment from other European countries. Although Spain did not develop a strong commercial class either at home or in the colonies, ranching and mining became large-scale colonial operations, and a variety of commercial enterprises sprang up.

As the years passed, the American-born Creole elite grew wealthy and chafed at European control. They found an opportunity to break away when Napoleon occupied Spain and Portugal and displaced the two royal houses, but the Creole leaders were also frightened by the popular violence of the French Revolution. They intended to control their struggle for independence and protect their privileged social positions and landed wealth. From 1808 to 1826 they fought and won a series of bitterly contested wars for independence; in Brazil members of the Portuguese royal family led the country peacefully into independence. The wars for independence scarcely improved the status of the lower classes who fought the battles, or prepared the way for a more fluid society. Independence, in effect, mainly allowed local elites to wield political power commensurate with their wealth. From the wars for independence and from the subsequent conflicts among the new republics there emerged in Latin America a large military establishment, a powerful military class, and a succession of caudillos, or dictators, emerging from the military.

The withdrawal of the Spanish and Portuguese transformed Latin America’s political elites, but the older patterns of economic exchange and dependency did not disappear. There was, however, a change in the network of trade partners because the British, as pioneers in the Industrial Revolution, were now able to move widely into Latin American markets. Because the Creole landowners wanted low-priced manufactured imports, British-manufactured goods met with little resistance or competition. British capital also financed the infrastructure, the docks, the roads, and eventually the railroads to support the expanding trade. Economic penetration by Britain (and soon by the United States) represented a new form of colonialism, or neocolonialism, an economic domination that did not require the acquisition of territory. In the late nineteenth century European and American investments and a flood of European immigration further tied Latin America to the outside world.

The Colossus to the North

Independence left the region politically fragmented and unstable, and many of the new republics became mired in civil and national wars. European political control might have been reimposed except for the American Monroe Doctrine, which (with British support) strongly opposed Continental interference with the independence of the new states. Later in the century the United States also made clear that in cases of civil disorder anywhere in the hemisphere it would not permit the Europeans to intervene to restore stability, protect investments, or collect debts, as was their custom in the era of expansive European imperialism. In what came to be known as the corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, President Theodore Roosevelt announced in 1904 that the United States alone would assume the responsibility of intervention for such purposes. Over the next quarter of a century the United States followed a policy of active armed intervention, or “dollar diplomacy,” mainly in Central America and the Caribbean until gradually modifying its more overt interventionism in the mid-1930s.

In the opening years of the twentieth century the United States began to rival the British as the dominant trading partner of Latin America, exporting its manufactures and purchasing many of the region’s primary agricultural and mineral products. After the First World War it gradually displaced Britain as the leading source of loans and capital investment. Although centers of manufacturing emerged, Latin America remained industrially underdeveloped, in part because of its dependency on the industrial world and in part because its impoverished masses provided a weak consumer base for industrial expansion. Meanwhile prices of the region’s agricultural and mining products became increasingly hostage to the world’s markets.

Economic Growth and Its Problems

Latin America suffered heavily when commodity prices plummeted in the dismal years of the Great Depression of the 1930s and foreign investment also dried up. The economic crisis encouraged the Latin Americans to look to their own resources and to attempt to industrialize, as Brazil did under the populist dictator Getulio Vargas in the years 1930 to 1945. When during the Second World War the region was cut off from traditional foreign sources of consumer goods, industrialization received additional stimulus.

After 1945 the economic structure of the entire region began to undergo significant transformation. It benefited from the increased demand for its raw materials and agricultural products and from an influx of foreign investment. The Alliance for Progress, sponsored by the United States in the early 1960s under President Kennedy, signaled a new North American commitment to the economic development of the region, even though Latin Americans repeatedly complained of being slighted in favor of other parts of the developing world. In the three decades from 1945 to 1975, Latin American economies grew steadily at impressive rates; steel production multiplied 20 times and electrical energy, metals, and machinery multiplied 10 times.

Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, despite many internal problems, could justifiably be classified among the newly industrialized countries of the world. Latin Americans manufactured industrial products in larger volume than ever before and no longer relied heavily on foreign imports for their industrial needs. The presence of American and European multinational corporations further stimulated economic progress. Much of this new industrialization, however, developed within a network of protective tariffs, subsidies, and state-controlled enterprises. Moreover, the region had only begun to utilize advanced technology, and low mass-purchasing power continued to impede growth. Economic expansion mostly benefited the social elites, increasing the gap between rich and poor.

To support economic development the major Latin American governments borrowed heavily in the 1970s from Western (mainly American) banks and international lending agencies, thereby becoming the most heavily indebted nations in the world; for many countries foreign debt nearly quadrupled. By the 1980s the failure to meet debt payments posed a serious financial threat to international creditors, and foreign banks and lending agencies took steps to ease interest payments. The austerity measures imposed by the lending agencies, however, threatened to reduce already depressed living standards. Even in better times many of the Latin American governments assigned a low priority to funding for schools, hospitals, roads, and public health facilities. Large military establishments and bureaucracies also consumed scarce resources. Driven by development ambitions and burdened by other expenditures, many governments simply printed paper money, debasing the currency and promoting extraordinary price rises. In the 1980s several countries suffered “quadruple-digit” annual inflation rates of over 1,000 percent.

The social difficulties of these unstable economies were compounded when agricultural commodity prices collapsed in the hyperinflation of the 1980s. Economic growth in Latin America slowed to below one percent, or even at times turned negative. As in other developing areas, the 1980s were in many ways a “lost decade.” In 1989 production per capita was lower than in 1980. But growth gradually resumed as many of the Latin American countries abandoned state controls, encouraged freer market economies, introduced sounder public finances, and brought inflation under control. With renewed confidence in the region’s economic prospects, foreign bankers and investors once again provided capital for Latin American companies and governments.

Despite economic advances, population growth rates remained a source of concern. As elsewhere in all of the developing world, death rates declined dramatically in the later decades of the twentieth century, and population growth surged. In Latin America it was even more difficult to cope with rising growth rates because of the Catholic church’s prohibition of artificial birth control, although such prohibition was often circumvented or ignored by the upper and middle classes. Growing in many years at three percent annually, the population tripled between 1950 and the 1990s, and the increase all but canceled economic and social gains for the masses of people. On the positive side, population began to stabilize in the more industrialized Latin American countries.

Over the years landless rural workers fled the impoverished countryside in all parts of Latin America, settling in the slums of the congested and polluted cities. A privileged upper-class minority kept many of its financial assets safely abroad but monopolized land and wealth at home. The per capita income in all Latin American nations still lagged well below the incomes of the wealthiest industrialized societies. By the early twenty-first century, the more prosperous countries such as Brazil, Mexico, and Chile had per capita incomes at about one-third the per capita income of nations such as Germany, Japan, France, or the United States. Although the economic elites in Latin America had become wealthy participants in the global economy, countries such as Haiti and Honduras ranked among the very poorest nations in the world. Bolivia, whose mineral wealth had once enriched the Incas and the Spanish, had the lowest per capita income of all the South American republics. Beginning in the 1960s, many priests and nuns responded to the economic inequities in Latin America on their own by preaching “liberation theology,” or “the church of the poor.” Despite opposition from the Vatican, they threw themselves into efforts to improve the lot of the impoverished. Other reformers showed renewed interest in the economic problems and cultural traditions of the indigenous peoples.

End of Yankee Imperialism?

Did the second half of the twentieth century change relationships with the economic colossus to the north? In its “good neighbor” policy in the 1930s the United States appeared to adopt an important step toward surrendering its interventionist prerogatives. Military interventions before 1933 in Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti formed a historical pattern that aroused resentment throughout Latin America. But American marines and troops continued to land in Latin America even after 1945, especially in Central America and the Caribbean, in such countries as Guatemala in 1954, the Dominican Republic in 1965-1966, Grenada in 1983, and Panama in 1989. At times the interventions were tied to American Cold War policies of “containment,” which were designed to oppose communism everywhere in the world.

As a goodwill gesture after the Second World War, the United States promoted the establishment in 1948 of the Organization of American States (or OAS). In the OAS 35 nations of the Western Hemisphere, including the United States and Canada, joined together to provide a mechanism for settling disputes among the republics. The OAS provided a more dignified alternative to traditional North American interventionism. Another step signaling a new era was the agreement by the United States in 1977 to hand over the Panama Canal to Panama, which took place in 1999.

Among the signs of change in the Western Hemisphere was a growing sense of economic interdependence. The United States needed a stable and prospering Latin America for its own economy. In 1994, at American initiative, the United States, Canada, and Mexico subscribed to the North American Free Trade Agreement, which over a period of time would eliminate all trade barriers among the three countries, and later be extended to other countries as well. Meanwhile large numbers of immigrants from Mexico, the Caribbean, and other parts of Latin America streamed northward, changing the ethnic composition of the United States itself and expanding the connections among peoples in this region of the world.

The Political Systems and Conflicts in Latin American Societies

Politically, the Latin American record for much of the twentieth century was mostly a history of insecure constitutional regimes and repressive military dictatorships, civil wars and social revolutions, ethnic tensions and labor unrest, coups and countercoups, and agitation against foreign, notably American, interests. There were also episodes of broad-based populist dictatorships with wide mass support, as in Brazil under Vargas, mentioned earlier, and in Argentina under Juan Perón from 1946 to 1955 (with peronismo exerting a continuing influence in later years). Disheartening cycles of reform and repression recurred. Central America reflected even greater volatility. Instability from the 1950s to the 1980s was intensified by American anti-Communist commitments in the Cold War and by American support for rightist elements in Central America, particularly in Nicaragua and El Salvador.

When leftist regimes were overthrown in Latin America in those years, frequently with unofficial United States help, as in Guatemala in 1954, Brazil in 1964, Chile and Uruguay in 1973, Argentina in 1976, and El Salvador in 1980, harsh repression often followed. Political opponents simply “disappeared”—they were imprisoned, tortured, and often executed, as the later record showed. Two of the most extreme examples occurred in Argentina and Chile. Argentina’s “Dirty War” against leftists claimed over 30,000 lives between 1976 and 1983. Even under democratic regimes in later years those responsible long went unpunished, although the misdeeds were openly acknowledged. A second striking example of military repression occurred in Chile, where a Left coalition elected in 1970 and committed to land reform as well as the nationalization of American-owned copper mines, was toppled three years later by a military coup with the involvement of the United States. The country’s democratically elected leftist president, Salvador Allende, and thousands of his supporters lost their lives, and brutal repression followed under a military regime headed for many years by General Augusto Pinochet. The Pinochet era, unlike many dictatorships, left a substantial record of economic growth but also produced bitter memories and a divided country. Arrested in later years while living abroad, Pinochet narrowly escaped trial on human rights charges in Europe but still faced trial in Chile.

The most sweeping attempt at social revolution in Latin America in the second half of the twentieth century occurred in Cuba. In 1933 Cuba had fallen under the heavy-handed repressive dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista. In 1959 Fidel Castro and a small band of leftist guerrillas returning from exile (among them Castro’s chief lieutenant Ernesto Che Guevara) succeeded in overthrowing the Batista dictatorship. Castro pledged to institute land reform and end economic dependence on the United States. When his government confiscated American corporate investments and landholdings, the United States retaliated with a trade embargo. Castro, not initially a Moscow-oriented Communist, moved into the Soviet orbit, and tensions over Cuba in 1962 in the context of the Cold War, as we shall see in Chapter 25, brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war.

Cuba became the only professedly Marxist state in the Western Hemisphere. Castro championed anti-imperialism worldwide, aided leftist movements in Bolivia and in Central America, and sent troops across the Atlantic to support anticolonial guerrilla armies in Africa. At home he created an advanced network of social services, promoted public health and literacy, and improved life for the rural masses; but economic failures and totalitarian coercion overshadowed these achievements. He became increasingly dependent on the Soviet bloc for economic aid, receiving favorable terms for the export of sugar and the import of oil. Castro ruled as a dictator. Political opponents fled into exile or were imprisoned. His militarized regime and global adventurism cost him support among the reform-minded in Latin America and elsewhere. When Soviet communism collapsed in 1989-1991, Castro lost the economic subsidies on which he depended and became a somewhat isolated figure in international affairs. Yet fidelismo had once been regarded as a threat to the United States and as an opening wedge to communism in the Western Hemisphere. Castro himself continued to govern Cuba in the early twenty-first century, leading a regime that remained in power almost 50 years after the revolution that swept the country in 1959.

Mexico and Brazil at the Beginning of the Twenty-First Century

The political implications of Latin America’s long postcolonial struggle for economic development could be seen in the region’s most populous nations, Mexico and Brazil. In Mexico, a large proportion of its more than 100 million people lived at subsistence levels at the beginning of the twenty-first century and, as in most of Latin America, wealth remained highly concentrated in the upper echelons of society. Yet Mexico had passed through numerous episodes of social revolution beginning in 1910, during which the power of the church and the military was curbed and land redistribution programs were introduced.

The dominant Mexican political organization, the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), heir to the Revolution of 1910, had long been revolutionary in name only. Opposition parties existed, but the PRI and a small business elite protected their own privileges and interests. The government promoted modernization but slighted social needs; nepotism and corruption flourished. As elsewhere, the human cost of social neglect was malnutrition, disease, infant mortality, limited schooling, illiteracy, and lower life expectancy for all but the social elite. The armed revolt in 1994 of an Indian-led peasant movement in the poor southern state of Chiapas dramatized the broad social and economic problems of Mexico’s poorest people. The PRI had retained the allegiance of the poor through subsidies and handouts, but its notorious corruption and its tight grip on power through years of controlled elections had left most Mexicans distrustful of all politicians. Despite industrialization and steadily expanding international trade, the economic gulf between rich and poor, and between north and south, increased in Mexico during the 1990s.

In the presidential election of 2000 the PRI candidate was defeated for the first time by a centrist business leader, Vincente Fox, whose victory brought the more conservative National Action Party to power and ended the 71-year era of PRI control. President Fox promised major economic and political reforms, but he faced strong opposition in the Mexican Congress and was unable to enact most of the changes he wanted to introduce. The Free Trade agreement with the United States (NAFTA), which went into effect in 1994, did not significantly enhance the economic conditions for most poor Mexicans, many of whom sought work by migrating into the United States. Economic problems continued to affect Mexican politics and contributed to the popularity of left-leaning political leaders such as the mayor of Mexico City, who rallied the opposition in a political movement that gained wide support from the nation’s lower classes.

Populist opposition to the traditional economic-political elites also emerged in Brazil, where a former leader of the Metalworkers’ Union, Lula da Silva, was elected president in 2002. Lula (as he was called) entered office after the first successful transfer of power between elected presidents in Brazil since the early 1960s, raising popular expectations for both the democratic political system and the economic conditions of Brazil’s poorest people. The new government’s policies were less radical than many had expected, however, and Lula’s popular support declined as he struggled to solve the problems of unemployment and to deal with corruption scandals among his own political allies. Brazil’s economy nevertheless showed a steady rate of growth, giving this largest of all South American nations an increasingly prominent role in the international economic system. A healthy Brazilian economy and political system had become essential for the stability and development of the whole continent.

The Advance of Latin American Democracy

In the early years of the twenty-first century, Latin America continued to be a diverse region economically and politically. Many Latin American countries were moving toward more stable constitutional government, trying to soften ideological conflict and working to loosen rigid state controls over their economies. Inflation, heavy debt, currency crises, and population growth, however, still made it difficult to meet the fundamental social needs of the region’s impoverished lower classes.

The constitutional democracies often remained fragile. In the 1990s military insurrections broke out in Argentina, Ecuador, and Venezuela; and the civilian president of Peru trampled on the constitution before he eventually was forced from office. In Colombia large-scale drug trafficking disrupted orderly government, and a left-wing guerrilla insurgency generated recurring cycles of political violence. In Central America the military often sought to gain or hold on to political power, claiming to protect public order against the dangers of mounting crime or the unrest of impoverished social groups. Poverty and deep-seated social inequities remained legacies of the region’s history.

Democracy thus continued to emerge and recede and to develop unevenly throughout Latin America. In 1960 virtually every nation in South America had an elected civilian leader, yet by 1976 all but a few countries in Central and South America had fallen under the control of military or rightist dictatorships. In the 1980s and into the 1990s, however, the trend shifted to democracy. For most of the 1990s no elected civilian president was overthrown by the military, but electorates were often frustrated and angered by the ineptitude and corruption of democratic political parties unable to cope effectively with social and economic issues.

Venezuela became an especially significant case of political discontent. Since 1958 it had been a leader in civilian democratic rule and orderly government. Two major parties shared patronage and political spoils for over 40 years, but, despite the country’s oil wealth, did little to relieve poverty and inequality. The election of Hugo Chávez in 1998 as president caused alarm in both of the traditional political parties. Chávez, a former colonel and paratrooper who in 1992 had led a bloody but unsuccessful military coup, won a landslide electoral victory, called for a “peaceful social revolution,” convened an assembly to write a new constitution, and after 18 months, in the summer of 2000, won reelection. Chávez soon thereafter gained authority from the National Assembly to enact legislation by decree. In the following years, he took new control of Venezuela’s state oil company, withstood a prolonged strike in the oil industry, and managed to prevail in a referendum that would have removed him from office. Critics complained bitterly that Chávez had revived the worst practices of past Latin American demagogues and repressive regimes, but he retained significant support among the lower classes, became an ardent supporter of Cuba’s Castro, and rallied nationalist sentiment by warning against the dangers of American intervention in Venezuelan politics. As a symbolic identification of his link to the nation’s revolutionary past and its nineteenth-century liberator, Simon Bolivar, he officially renamed the country the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The political practices of earlier eras in Latin American history were therefore still appearing in some places during the first decade of the twenty-first century. By the early years of the new century, however, most of Latin America had followed the lead of other industrial countries in moving toward privatization, free trade, open markets, and globalization. Despite periodic setbacks, democracy was growing to be the prevalent pattern of government. But integration into the global economy had not yet brought prosperity or a more balanced distribution of wealth for the vast majority of Latin Americans. The region was also subject to severe financial crises, including the destabilization of national currencies in countries such as Mexico in 1994 and Brazil in 1998.

A new cluster of leftist governments emerged in the early twenty-first century—Hugo Chávez in Venezuela; Lula da Silva in Brazil; Evo Morales in Bolivia; the first indigenous Indian president ever to be elected to that position in Latin America; and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, the first woman to be elected president of a major country on the continent, and a Socialist. They and older leftist movements still made their presence felt, and a rising generation of young activists strongly criticized the global free market economy (and the United States as its leading champion) for benefiting only the wealthier nations and neglecting the needs of the impoverished.

Many of the economic and political challenges that confronted the postcolonial nations of Asia after 1945 could therefore be found also in most of Latin America: a legacy of unequal economic exchange with the more industrialized countries, for example, and enduring political conflicts that carried forward an earlier history of political violence from both the left and right wings of the continent’s various national and regional cultures. It was nevertheless clear by the early twenty-first century that the nations of Latin America, like the nations of modern Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, had all moved irrevocably into the global economy and the mainstream of contemporary international affairs.