Chapter 24

EMPIRES INTO NATIONS: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST AFTER THE SECOND WORLD WAR

117. The African Revolution

118. Ferment in the Middle East

119. Revolution and War in the Persian Gulf

120. The Developing World

The eternise of European empires led to the establishment of new nations throughout Africa and the Middle East after 1945, but this momentous and widely celebrated transition also generated numerous new trouble zones during the Cold War and new regional, ethnic, or religious conflicts that persisted after Soviet-American rivalries faded in the late 1980s. Given their geographical proximity to Europe, the vast lands and diverse populations of Africa and the Middle East had long been affected by waves of European expansion—from the medieval crusades to the imperial competition of powerful nineteenth-century nation-states and the League of Nations’ post-1919 distribution of territorial “mandates” to Britain and France. By the mid-twentieth century, however, nationalist movements had emerged everywhere (as in Asia) to oppose such outside intervention. Facing this opposition and weakened by two world wars, Europeans gradually lost the political will and the resources to maintain imperial rule in their African colonies and in the Middle Eastern mandates that they had controlled after the breakup of the Ottoman Empire at the end of the First World War.

Although the French resisted the nationalist upsurge in Algeria, the British suppressed anticolonial militants in Kenya, and the Portuguese fought to keep their colonies in Angola and Mozambique, the new wave of independence movements would ultimately manage to free every African country from European control. The emergence of new nations was nevertheless complicated by the fact that they generally encompassed diverse ethnic and linguistic groups whom the colonial powers had brought together within the artificial boundaries of a single political territory. This legacy of colonial administration often led to ethnic conflicts that destabilized African political systems or produced authoritarian governments.

Meanwhile, the Arab countries of North Africa and the Middle East entered into a prolonged conflict with the new Jewish state of Israel, which was established in 1948 after the British withdrew from the mandate they had exercised over Palestine. The creation of Israel represented the triumphant fulfillment of a Zionist movement that had grown steadily since the late nineteenth century and gained new support after the devastating Nazi Holocaust, but it also brought about the displacement of a large Palestinian Arab population, a series of regional wars, the resurgence of an Islamic and Arabic religious fervor, and an intractable international issue that would involve the major world powers. The recurring conflicts in Africa and the Middle East also became entangled in the Cold War and in the global competition for key natural resources such as oil and minerals, so that the economic and political stability of the wider global system was much affected by the turmoil in these regions of the world.

We take up the postcolonial history of Africa and the Middle East in the first sections of this chapter and then conclude the chapter with the more general problems of Third World economic development previously encountered in the modern histories of Asia and Latin America. Contemporary analysis of the global economy often focuses on commodity production, labor costs, currency exchanges or the distribution of goods and services; but the modern history of Africa and the Middle East shows that economic history cannot be easily separated from the powerful currents of religion, nationalism, and ethnicity that swirl constantly around the global trade of oil, agricultural products, money, and advanced technologies.

117. THE AFRICAN REVOLUTION

Africa is a large continent, considerably larger than North and Central America combined. With an estimated population of 220 million in 1950 and almost 900 million in 2000, it has had one of the fastest-growing populations in the world, although the ravages of AIDS have taken a serious toll since the 1980s. A distinction may be made between North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa. North Africa, stretching from Mauritania and Morocco to Egypt, mostly Muslim and Arab, belongs as much to the Mediterranean world (and even more to the Islamic Middle East) in ethnic composition, culture, geography, and history. In sub-Saharan Africa, to the south, below the Sahara Desert, lives a population of over 600 million people, where Islam, Christianity, and traditional African animist faiths are found and where the population is predominantly black. An ethnographic and linguistic map of Africa would reveal hundreds of different ethnic groups and some 800 African languages, of which about 50 are spoken by a half million people or more. A large number of Africans since the colonial era also speak English or French, and there are also numerous descendants of European and South Asian settlers and immigrants, most notably in South Africa.

In 1945 the map of Africa was scarcely different from what it had been in 1914. All of Africa was European-governed with the exceptions of Egypt, Liberia, and Ethiopia (the latter had regained its independence from Italy during the Second World War). By the early 1960s, however, there were 35 independent states, and most of Africa was either independent or close to achieving independence. By the early twenty-first century there were 53 independent African states, making up more than a fourth of the membership of the United Nations. Of the 53 states, all but five were in sub-Saharan Africa.

The new states differed from older nations in many ways. Africa’s territorial boundaries, as we have seen, were drawn hastily during the era of European imperial expansion in the late nineteenth century, and the new states often contained highly diverse ethnic and linguistic groups. These groups usually lacked the “national” affinities that are associated with the concept of a “nation-state,” while ethnically related peoples were frequently distributed over two or more countries. When independence brought the African states the full panoply of national sovereignty, the people in these states had a less unified national heritage than those in most older nations of Europe and Asia, and the new African governments faced the daunting challenge of welding their disparate ethnic groups into nationhood. The age of imperialism had left the African states economically underdeveloped, dependent on world markets, and with little experience in self-governing institutions; the very rapidity of the transition to independence added to their difficulties. Ethnic or civil wars and regional conflicts marked much of Africa’s first half-century of independence. The following survey of important developments in postcolonial Africa can only sketch the broad outlines of African history in these years.

French North Africa

During the Second World War the Allied leaders had made various commitments to self-determination. With Italy defeated (and Ethiopia liberated), the wartime Allies in 1951 granted independence also to the former Italian colony of Libya, and the British took steps to end what was left of their privileged position in Egypt. These events galvanized French North Africa, where Arab nationalist leaders, often French-educated, had pressed for independence since the 1920s. In Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria—the Maghreb, as these Arab states of northwest Africa are called—the nationalists mounted a vigorous campaign. Morocco and Tunisia were not outright colonies but French protectorates under their traditional rulers, the Moroccan sultan and the Tunisian bey. The French in 1956 granted independence to both countries. The Moroccan sultan became king as a constitutional monarch, but as the years went by, the monarchy increasingly enlarged its powers. Tunisia became a republic and was governed for its first 30 years by Habib Bourguiba, who introduced many democratic reforms (including rights of divorce for women) but insisted on being named president for life. In both countries modernization and pressures for liberalization continued long after independence, often against counterpressures from Muslim traditionalists.

Algeria’s story was very different. In the early nineteenth century the French entered Algeria, part of the decaying Ottoman Empire, and after several brutal military campaigns it became a fully controlled French colony by mid-century. Later in the century French and other Europeans settled there in substantial numbers, creating large immigrant communities that came to dominate the political and economic life of the country and its Arab population. The French meanwhile provided a few limited measures for Algerian self-rule and representation along with a promise that further concessions could be made when the country became fully assimilated to French and European ways. Some additional political concessions were granted in the interwar years, but after 1945 Algerian nationalists pressed for full independence. Although Algeria was represented in the French legislature in Paris, the suffrage in Algeria was heavily weighted in favor of the European settlers to the distinct disadvantage of the Arab majority. Of the 9 million or so inhabitants, about 1 million were Europeans. The colons, or European settlers, mostly French, like the family of the French writer Albert Camus, had lived there for generations. Because the Europeans controlled the economy and owned most of the land and industry, they feared for their political and economic privileges if Algeria were cut loose from France and governed by an Arab Muslim majority smarting from years of unequal treatment. The French military suppressed initial postwar uprisings, but the nationalist movement grew, and in the autumn of 1954 the National Liberation Front (FLN) launched a fierce guerrilla war against the French.

The French-Algerian war lasted 7 1/2 years, involving at its peak 500,000 French troops and provoking sharp political divisions within France itself. The Algerian armed forces received aid and support from Egypt and other Arab states. Torture and cruelty became common on both sides. In the spring of 1958, during a French cabinet crisis in which the Europeans in Algeria feared that a negotiated settlement might be arranged, an insurrection by army leaders and diehard settlers in Algiers brought political changes in Paris and General Charles de Gaulle’s return to power. To the dismay of the army leaders, however, de Gaulle unexpectedly arranged a cease-fire and soon spoke of autonomy and self-determination for the Algerians. In 1962, in a referendum, he won the backing of the French electorate for full independence. Army leaders thereupon rebelled, and some of his closest former associates helped form a secret army of terrorists who bombed and killed, and even attempted his assassination. Nevertheless, de Gaulle pressed on with negotiations for Algerian independence, and in 1962 French rule ended. The long and brutal war had cost the lives of 10,000 French and 100,000 Algerian combatants as well as many thousands of Algerian civilians.

After independence there was a mass exodus of Europeans from Algeria, but most of the French and Algerians were grateful that de Gaulle had ended the ordeal. The French accepted the loss of Algeria and of other parts of their large African empire, and with a prospering economy in the 1960s turned their attention to other matters. Although staunchly anti-Western, the Algerians accepted French technical assistance for the development of Algeria’s extensive oil and natural gas resources.

The FLN retained power and governed the country under a military-dominated one-party regime for the next 30 years. The party became increasingly corrupt, and it mismanaged the cumbersome state-owned planned economy, which survived only through the country’s oil and gas revenues. In the 1980s about three-fourths of all young Algerians were without jobs and many were homeless as well. An additional 2 million Algerians migrated in search of jobs, mainly to France, where they were not always warmly welcomed. In 1988 general frustration in Algeria with the political and economic situation exploded into urban riots.

In its effort to cement ties with other Arab states, the Algerian military leaders had allowed Islamic fundamentalists to teach and to grow in political influence. Among the parties that emerged was an extremist Islamic Salvation Front. It organized itself into a mass political movement, offered itself as a substitute for the FLN and won broad support. It vehemently opposed the Western-style secularization that had emancipated women from Islamic rules in dress and other matters and pressed for the reimposition of fundamentalist rules of dress and comportment. In late 1991 the Islamic party overwhelmingly won the first multiparty parliamentary elections ever held in the country, but the army leaders peremptorily canceled the election results and declared the Islamic party illegal.

After 1992 the social and political life of Algeria entered a violent phase. The armed movement of the Islamic extremists unleashed a reign of terror, attacking whole villages and settlements. Moderate Islamic leaders were helpless. The military responded with brutal terror of its own, and well over 100,000 people died in the insurgent attacks or in the repression that followed. The violence eventually declined after the Islamic radicals declared a cease-fire and after the government, in 2000, proclaimed a broad amnesty for the rebels. But the large underclass still faced pressing economic problems, and ethnic tensions also strained relations between the nation’s Arab and indigenous minority Berber population, which was Muslim but not Arab. Algeria was thus affected by the assertion of local ethnic identities as well as the powerful force of Islamic political movements, and it was still struggling to sustain a stable, democratic state almost a half century after the end of its long war for independence from France.

End of British Rule in West Africa

In North Africa nationalist agitation for independence, already under way in the interwar years, might have been expected, but south of the Sahara the movement for liberation was never as far advanced. Here black African populations still lived in colonial empires that Europeans had carved out either in the colonial age that opened in the fifteenth century or in the “scramble for Africa” in the brief decade and a half of European imperialist competition after 1885.

Yet independence movements, barely in existence before 1945, soon announced their presence. The British first resisted the mounting nationalist pressures, imprisoning or exiling nationalist leaders, but then, recognizing the strength of the liberation movements and the pressures of their own postwar economic problems, they decided in the 1950s to change their imperial policies. Britain thereafter moved quickly to grant autonomy to its colonies, which soon became dominions and then independent republics.

For many years the postcolonial republics were mostly ruled by authoritarian governments more interested in sustaining their own power than in developing democratic societies. Although there was a trend toward democratization across parts of the continent in the 1990s, serious economic challenges persisted almost everywhere. African economies remained underindustrialized and therefore highly dependent on international development assistance and on the fluctuating price of commodities in the global economy.

The Gold Coast (soon renamed Ghana) was the first British colony to win independence, and its subsequent history showed the kind of postcolonial economic and political patterns that would reappear in many former African colonies. The British initially resisted a militant civil disobedience movement led by the nationalist leader Kwame Nkrumah and even imprisoned him. But in 1951 they freed Nkrumah and conceded self-government.

Nkrumah’s party overwhelmingly won the elections that followed, and he became prime minister. In 1957 the colony won full independence with dominion status, and in 1960 Nkrumah transformed it into a republic with himself as president. With independence, the country shed the name of Gold Coast, which was too closely identified with the centuries of imperialist exploitation and the slave trade. It called itself Ghana, recalling an African kingdom somewhat to the north which had flourished from the sixth to the eleventh centuries. Nkrumah quickly gathered extensive power into his own hands, banned opposition parties, governed autocratically, and declared himself president for life. The early postcolonial history of Ghana thus showed a pattern that would recur in Africa (and in Asia): charismatic nationalist leaders who led the struggles for independence repeatedly turned into personal dictators once independence was won, and the party of the independence movement often became the basis for one-party governments.

Nkrumah adopted an anti-Western stance, championed a nonalignment policy in the Cold War, and sought a leading role in a pan-African movement, hosting in 1958 the first All-African People’s Congress in Ghana’s capital, Accra. He cultivated close ties with the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China. He introduced, and his successors continued, a program of “African socialism,” placing the economy under rigorous state control. In these new forms of socialism in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, the state ran the economy, the ruling elite accumulated power and wealth, and there was little of the egalitarianism promised by traditional socialist doctrines and theories. The Ghanaian economy was generally prosperous when the nation gained its independence, largely because Ghana was the world’s largest producer of cocoa and the source of a tenth of the world’s gold. But the economy declined in the 1960s, in part because of ill-conceived development projects, and Ghana became heavily dependent on foreign loans.

Fed up with Nkrumah’s arbitrary rule, unbridled extravagances, and cult of personality, military leaders ousted him in 1966. There then followed a series of military coups with only brief sporadic efforts to return to constitutional and civilian rule. Finally, in 1979 a junior air force officer, Flight Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings, seized control. He introduced a program of self-sufficiency and austerity and curbed a number of state controls of the economy. With financial assistance from the World Bank and market reforms the economy in the late 1980s began to show significant growth. By the early 1990s Rawlings was offering the promise of a more liberal political regime, including free, multiparty elections. At the opening of the new century, after two decades in power, Rawlings voluntarily surrendered the presidency in accordance with the terms of a constitution that had been introduced in the early 1990s. His elected successor, John Agyekum Kufuor, was returned to office in democratic elections at the end of 2004, providing new evidence that Ghana was continuing to move toward a more stable and open political system. Every phase of Ghana’s postindependence history—especially the gradual evolution from authoritarian rule toward more democratic government in the early twenty-first century—resembled general trends that could be seen in much of postcolonial Africa; the democratization in Ghana became part of a wider African movement for political reform.

Nigeria

Nigeria, the largest British-governed colonial territory in Africa, has remained the most populous country in postcolonial Africa, with a population of over 125 million by the early twenty-first century, and with 250 ethnic groups. The four largest, the Hausa and Fulani in the north and the Yoruba and Ibo in the south, all of which had had distinctive important cultures, trading economies, and city-state organizations in precolonial times, comprise two-thirds of the population. Britain had established its hold over the country through conquests and treaties in the mid-nineteenth century, but it had governed “indirectly” through local traditional rulers, excluding Nigerians from any significant role in self-government at higher levels.

Western-educated Nigerians, who had pressed for political representation in the 1920s, stepped up pressure after the Second World War. In 1960 Britain granted Nigeria independence and in 1963 it became a republic, with the respected nationalist leader Nnandi Azikewe as its first president. To cope with the country’s ethnic diversity, the constitution established three large geographical regions and 21 federal states. With a constitution, democratic machinery, a federal structure, political parties, and guarantees of civil rights the Nigerian republic held the promise of serving as a democratic model for the rest of the continent.

Unfortunately, regional and ethnic tensions, civil war, and a succession of military coups thwarted that promise. Only six years after independence a brutal civil war broke out. Because the northern region had come to dominate the government, the educated and economically advanced Ibos in the south, mostly Christian, saw themselves as excluded from an appropriate national role. In 1966 Ibo army officers staged a coup, but a Hausa-led military takeover almost immediately followed and became the signal for a widespread slaughter of Ibos. Large numbers of Ibos fled to the east, where in 1967 they proclaimed an independent state of Biafra. A terrible civil war and blockade lasted 2'A years, from 1967 to 1970, and resulted in close to a million deaths from the blockade and starvation. The Ibo secession collapsed. After the war the federal government followed a policy of reconciliation, reintegrated the Ibos into national life, and sought, with some success, to overcome other regional and ethnic differences as well.

But more coups and assassinations took place and the military remained in control. In 1979 General Olusegnu Abusanjo after three years of military rule restored civilian government, but in 1985 a new coup returned the military to power. Although they promised to restore free elections, they did not do so until eight years later.

For a time, in the early 1970s, Nigeria enjoyed a booming economy, based on its large oil resources, which made it the world’s sixth largest oil producer. Lagos, the Nigerian capital at the time, quadrupled in size. But the oil wealth failed to stimulate broader economic development and corruption was endemic. Severe drought and a growing population forced dependence on food imports, which led to inflation and debt.

The 1990s brought important political changes. When the military eventually permitted presidential elections in 1993, the popular opposition leader Moshood Abiola clearly won, but the ruling general nullified the results and imprisoned Abiola. His death in prison five years later, allegedly of a heart attack, sparked nationwide protests that eventually brought a restoration of civilian government. In the 1999 elections the voters turned to General Obesanjo, who 20 years earlier had been the first Nigerian military ruler to give up power voluntarily to a civilian regime, and Obesanjo was reelected to the presidency in 2003.

Nigeria’s early promise of parliamentary democracy, repeatedly frustrated over the past four decades, was showing clear signs of renewal. The widespread problems of government corruption and poverty persisted, however, and even the steady rise in global oil prices brought little direct economic benefit to most of Nigeria’s growing population. The country also suffered from renewed ethnic tensions and from a cycle of violence between Muslims and Christians, which caused numerous deaths in northern Nigeria. Despite such internal problems, the nation’s oil production and sheer size gave it a major role in African affairs, which included the dispatch of Nigerian soldiers to serve as peacekeepers in various regional conflicts.

End of British Rule in East Africa: Katya, Tanzania, Uganda

In East Africa, especially in Kenya, the independence movements after 1945 encountered obstacles, but the struggles to establish new nations moved through the usual political stages to achieve sovereign statehood. European settlers, who had arrived early in the century in considerable numbers, dominated economic and political life. They had dispossessed the Kikiyu and Maasai peoples to create large coffee and tea plantations on the most desirable land. Many Indians had also arrived from South Asia as merchants and traders. Africans, restricted to working as subsistence small farmers, agricultural laborers, and unskilled workers in the cities, resented their second-class economic and social status.

In the 1920s young nationalist leaders, many of whom, like Jomo Kenyatta, had studied abroad, agitated for land reform and African representation in government. After the Second World War a movement for independence led by Kenyatta and his party gathered momentum. When the European settlers stubbornly resisted pressures for independence, the militants responded with violence and acts of terrorism. The settlers retaliated, and as the violence mounted, the British declared a state of emergency and imprisoned or removed from the troubled area many of the nationalist leaders. Eventually, however, the British faced up to the inevitable. They ended the state of emergency, released Kenyatta, and in 1963 granted Kenya independence. Over 55,000 Europeans left the country.

Kenya became a republic in 1964 with Kenyatta as its first president.

Until his death 14 years later he completely dominated political life, following the all-too-familiar pattern of the independence leader’s turning dictator after independence. Like other new African leaders he championed pan-Africanism and neutralism in the Cold War.

When he died in office in 1978, Daniel arap Moi, who had been his vice president, governed under the same kind of authoritarian one-party regime, rejecting pressures for liberalization. The economy deteriorated and unemployment ran high, but international lending agencies refused to provide aid until reforms were undertaken. Democratic elections were finally instituted in the 1990s, and Moi left office in 2002; but the transfer of power to the opposition leader did not end the country’s political unrest. New disputes arose over proposed revisions in the constitution, and there were persistent charges of widespread corruption. Other issues in Kenyan political life, including controversial questions of land ownership and long-term leases, were still influenced by the legacy of British colonialism, so that postcolonial transitions were still affecting Kenya in the early twenty-first century.

The other main East African states, Tanzania and Uganda, also passed through a series of domestic political changes after gaining independence in the early 1960s. Tanzania was established after a revolutionary movement merged the former British-controlled territories of Tanganyika and Zanzibar in 1964. Its political life was dominated by the nationalist leader Julius Nyerere, who did not allow opposition parties or free elections during the 25 years in which he held office. Nyerere therefore stymied the development of democratic political life, but he introduced a number of useful reforms.

By promoting literacy and establishing Swahili along with English as the official language of public life, he helped unite the country’s ethnic and linguistic groups. His economic policies were less successful and the country remained impoverished. Also a champion of “African socialism,” he nationalized much of the economy, including agriculture. In the Cold War he drew close to the Soviet Union and to China, and for a time Tanzania served as a principal bridgehead for Chinese Communist influence on the African continent. Under Nyerere’s successors, the government denationalized many state industries, sought to end overly rigid economic controls, and restored collective farms to family cultivation. In 1995 it held its first multiparty elections, which brought to power another long-serving president—Benjamin William Mkapa. The country’s economic problems were soon aggravated by a flood of hundreds of thousands of refugees from civil wars in neighboring states and by the deadly AIDS epidemic, but Mkapa was able to maintain a stable government and to win reelection in 2002.

Uganda, which Winston Churchill once described as the “pearl of Africa” because of its natural beauty, won independence in 1962. It, too, encompassed many ethnic groups, who had been brought together in a British protectorate during the 1890s. Uganda was the scene of much missionary activity. Both Protestantism and Roman Catholicism made many converts so that the population became two-thirds Christian. While some permanent European settlers established large plantations, the African farmers cultivated small plots of cotton, tea, and coffee. South Asians arrived to play a leading role as merchants. In 1921 Britain established a legislative council, but the first African members were admitted only in 1945, and not until several years later did they receive a substantial number of seats. Pressure for independence continued.

With independence near, political parties emerged, ethnic rivalries sharpened, and the traditional, central kingdom of Buganda demanded a separate state. Political organizations that were resentful and suspicious of Bugandan intentions coalesced into the leading party, and Milton Obote, its leader, became prime minister. In 1963 a constitution transformed Uganda into a republic. As a compromise, the king of Buganda, the kabaka, was elected ceremonial president. But in 1966 Obote, bent on centralizing authority, forced the kabaka to flee the country. Obote promptly concentrated more and more power into his own hands, and over the next five years alienated many in the country. In 1971 a flamboyant, ruthless soldier, Idi Amin, rose from the ranks to become commanding general, seized power, and for eight years brutalized the country, shocking Africa and the world with executions, massacres, and torture. As many as 300,000 Ugandans may have lost their lives; entire ethnic groups were singled out for destruction. A once prosperous agricultural economy with thriving coffee, tea, and cotton exports lay in ruins. Professionals and intellectuals fled. In 1972 he expelled some 60,000 Asians, mostly Indians, who had been a strong presence in the country’s commerce and industry. In 1976 he declared himself president for life. At last, in 1979, after he had invaded northern Tanzania over disputed border territory and devastated the area, a Tanzanian army, accompanied by Ugandan exiles, moved into Uganda and overthrew the dictator.

Obote, the former president, returning with the Tanzanian army, regained power and crushed all opposition forces. Additional tens of thousands lost their lives or fled to neighboring states. Eventually a guerrilla army under Yoweri Museveni, which had fought a guerrilla war against Idi Amin, now helped to overthrow Obote. Museveni took power in 1986 and began to restore a measure of constitutional government. He also took the first steps to rehabilitate the devastated country. Economic production in Uganda in 1989 was one-fifth what it had been at the time of independence; but a measure of political stability, international financial assistance, and foreign investment made economic growth once again possible. The political atmosphere became freer. The government pioneered in aggressive steps to check the spread of the AIDS epidemic that was ravaging the country.

In the early twenty-first century Uganda still faced guerrilla warfare in the countryside led by a fanatical, self-styled Christian religious leader, whose military tactics included the mass abduction of young children who were then used as slave labor or armed as soldiers. Museveni also became involved in the complicated and shifting warfare in Congo. Violence thus remained a problem in Uganda, and the country had not yet established an open, democratic political culture. Museveni disappointed many of his democratic supporters when he took steps in disregard of the constitution to renew his presidency. But Uganda had moved beyond the brutal excesses and ethnic repressions of the 1960s and 1970s.

Southern Africa

In southern Africa the British peacefully transferred power in the early 1960s to black majority governments in Zambia (formerly Northern Rhodesia), Malawi, and Botswana. But elsewhere in this part of the African continent a white colonial minority held out against yielding or even sharing power.

In Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) the British government in London tried to negotiate political rights for the black majority before granting independence, but the small white community resisted, and in 1965 it unilaterally proclaimed independence from Britain. After 15 years of escalating guerrilla warfare and international political and economic pressure, the white leaders yielded. In 1980 Southern Rhodesia became Zimbabwe, with a black majority government. Within a few years the independence leader Robert Mugabe, combining the posts of president and prime minister, created a one-party state, which he continued to govern for more than twenty-five years. Frustrated by the country’s continuing economic difficulties, he allowed and even encouraged armed Africans to seize land that had long been in the hands of white fellow Zimbabweans; violence erupted in many parts of the country, creating alarming episodes of unrest and lawlessness, but opposition political groups were unable to influence government policies or to compete for parliamentary seats in free and fair elections. President Mugabe clung to power in the first decade of the new century— though he was an increasingly isolated “strongman” who had lost the support of both the international community and many of his compatriots who had once supported his leadership of the struggle for national independence.

The Union of South Africa

In the extreme south of the continent, in the Union of South Africa, a special drama unfolded. In the late 1980s in a population of just over 40 million, about 6 million whites lived uneasily with 30 million blacks, 3 million people of mixed background (denominated “coloureds”), and 1 million Asians; both of the latter groups were classified as nonwhites. The whites, though a minority, were far more numerous than elsewhere in Africa south of the Sahara and had lived there for a long time. They were numerous enough to constitute a social and cultural outpost of European civilization and to develop an expanding, prosperous economy, but they were greatly outnumbered, and many feared losing their dominant status. About half the whites, the Afrikaners, were mainly descendants of Dutch Calvinist immigrants from as far back as the founding of Cape Town in 1652; the other half represented immigration from Great Britain since the 1820s. The two halves did not easily mix. The Afrikaners, during their long isolation from Europe, developed a new language of their own, Afrikaans, derived from Dutch; and they retained unpleasant memories of British expansion, especially of the Boer war in the late nineteenth century.

In 1948 the Afrikaner-controlled Nationalist party came to power for the first time, campaigning for racial separation and the preservation of a white-dominated society. It legislated a sweeping policy of apartheid (the Afrikaans word for separation or segregation). The new laws excluded blacks from political life and imposed blatant forms of racial discrimination in housing, transportation, land ownership, and employment. Between 1950 and 1980 well over 1 million nonwhites in the cities were forced to leave white areas of residence and to relocate. Permits to blacks for urban jobs were granted only as industry required workers. Under a program of “separate development,” the government also established four of a projected ten autonomous homelands (bantustans) for various black ethnic groups, but they met with little favor or outside acceptance. The land was poor and movement from the “homelands” to the rest of the country was strictly regulated. The practices of apartheid and the racist laws enforcing it were internationally condemned. Finding itself increasingly isolated from the rest of the world, the South African government in 1961 broke all official ties with Britain and the Commonwealth and proclaimed itself the Republic of South Africa.

Opponents, black and white, of the restrictive laws encountered police brutality, torture, preventive detention, and prison sentences. Nelson Mandela, the black leader of the African National Congress, was sentenced to life imprisonment. Despite the prolonged detention of Mandela and other leaders, the African National Congress waged a determined campaign for racial equality which included demonstrations, strikes, and armed struggle. The regime attempted to suppress the black movement with military force, and there were tragic clashes at Sharpeville in 1960 and at Soweto in 1976, among others, costing the lives of hundreds of black protesters. By the 1970s increasing numbers of whites were protesting apartheid, and the United Nations had imposed sanctions. The United States, which had gone through its own much needed civil rights movement in the 1960s, joined in the economic sanctions and encouraged business corporations to withdraw or withhold investments.

The international political and economic pressures began to have an impact on the regime. A more enlightened wing of the Nationalist party attempted to moderate the apartheid laws, but initial reforms aroused opposition from Afrikaner diehards. In 1989 President F. W. de Klerk, anxious to defuse the explosive situation and sensitive to international opinion as well as the threatened deterioration of the economy, accelerated the reform program. In 1990 the government freed Nelson Mandela, who had become an internationally acclaimed hero and martyr after his more than 27 years in prison. In 1991 the government repealed all of the apartheid laws, ending over a half-century of enforced legal segregation. A year later the white electorate voted overwhelmingly in a referendum to end white minority rule. In Mandela’s words, the “countdown to democracy” had begun.

In 1994 the first democratic nonracial elections, in which 22 million voters participated, brought Mandela and the African National Congress to power with provisions for a multiparty government of national unity during the period of transition. In 1996 the country adopted a constitution with the broadest bill of rights to be found anywhere in the world. It not only guaranteed political freedoms, but it also proclaimed social and economic entitlement to adequate food, housing, education, and health care. Meanwhile a Truth and Reconciliation Commission held hearings that disclosed the former government’s full panoply of cruel abuses and acts of violence. In what many considered a model worthy of imitation in other post-autocratic regimes, amnesty was guaranteed to all who came forward with confessions of wrongdoing.

After its long travail, and with enormous challenges, South Africa at last had the opportunity to create a nonracial democratic political system. The government in its first five years brought electricity and clean water to millions. During the country’s second post-apartheid elections, in 1999, the African National Congress party came under heavy criticism for not accomplishing more but again won a sweeping victory and Thabo Mbeki replaced Nelson Mandela, who was voluntarily retiring, as the country’s president. Mbeki, who was elected to a second term in 2004, sought to improve economic conditions for the country’s black majority; but he lacked Mandela’s skills, and he also stubbornly refused to recognize the true dimensions and causes of the AIDS epidemic. South Africa still faced poverty, unemployment, and a high crime rate, all heightened by the continuing spread of AIDS. Land ownership remained predominantly in white hands; 85 percent of the population was black, but they owned only about 20 percent of the land. The standard of living for white South Africans, it was estimated, ranked 24th in the world; that of black South Africans, 126th. But the battle for the most elementary political and social freedoms had been won.

The political transformation in South Africa affected the whole region because the white-dominated earlier regime had intervened to oppose black-led independence movements in other African countries. At the same time it had refused to surrender its international trusteeship over what had once been German Southwest Africa. The black leadership there, with the support of the United Nations, sought independence as the new state of Namibia, but it required a long guerrilla war before Namibia’s independence was officially recognized in 1990.

The French Sub-Saharan Empire

The French, largely as a consequence of the bloody war in Algeria, dissolved the remainder of their vast colonial empire in sub-Saharan Africa peacefully. After the Second World War they had hoped that a French-educated and assimilated African elite would maintain ties to France in a loosely organized French Union. They gave the African colonies representation in the French National Assembly and promised self-governing institutions, but control remained centralized in Paris, and by the mid-1950s the African colonies, inspired by nationalist movements elsewhere, pressed for independence. De Gaulle recognized the inexorable pressure for independence and offered the sub-Saharan colonies their freedom of choice. By 1960 all 15 colonies had chosen independence.

Many, however, retained close ties with France for economic aid and cultural cooperation. France remained a strong presence among the African francophone nations (and indeed the strongest presence of all the Western countries on the African continent), training the armies of the new states, lending financial assistance, and taking a leading role in economic development.[1] On numerous occasions after 1960 the French intervened in Africa with military force. In 1979, for example, they helped overthrow a brutal dictator who had seized power in the Central African Republic in 1966 and for 13 years ruled as head of a self-proclaimed Central African Empire. In Chad, they intervened when rebels in the north backed by Libya threatened to overthrow the government; and in 2004 they intervened in the C6te d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast), where French peacekeepers were killed during a civil war that unexpectedly erupted in that hitherto peaceful country.

[1] The francophone, or French-speaking, sub-Saharan African states emerging from the French colonial empire in 1960 were Benin (until 1975 called Dahomey), Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of Congo (Brazzaville), Gabon, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Madagascar (or Malagasy Republic), Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Togo, and Burkina Faso (until 1984 called Upper Volta). Comoros became independent in 1975; Djibouti, in 1977. Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia, in North Africa, are also part of francophone Africa as former French protectorates. The former Belgian colonial territories must also be included: the Democratic Republic of Congo (once the Belgian Congo, and from 1971 to 1997 called Zaire), and Burundi and Rwanda (once Belgian trusteeships).

France thus continued to see itself as a key international power in African affairs. The French organized the African Financial Community, helped stabilize African currencies, and became the largest donor of aid to the continent. While some African leaders criticized such actions as neocolonialism, others viewed the French presence more as a partnership than an intrusion. As elsewhere in Africa, the promise of democratic government in the former French colonies turned for the most part into civilian or military dictatorships, even if the degree of repression varied. Here too the independence party often became the sole legally recognized political party. Presidents concentrated power in their own hands, often holding office for 20 years or more.

The Belgian Congo: From Mobutu's Zaire to the Democratic Republic of Congo

The Belgian Congo was a byword for European imperialist exploitation and cruelty in the late nineteenth century. The most abusive features were remedied before 1914, but political control remained concentrated in Brussels and little was done to prepare the large colony (it was 80 times the size of Belgium) for self-government. Agitation for independence intensified when the neighboring French Congo, its capital at Brazzaville, won independence in 1960 and became the Republic of Congo.

Faced with pressure for independence, the Belgian government, which had first proposed a transition period of 30 years, decided against gradualism and in 1960 announced its withdrawal in six months’ time. Chaos followed. The two key nationalist leaders, one of them the leftist leader Patrice Lumumba, were at odds with one another. Ethnic and regional antagonisms ran deep, and no one was prepared to carry out governmental responsibilities. The army mutinied, and the soldiers turned against their European officers. Meanwhile the copper-producing province of Shaba (then called Katanga) attempted to secede. Belgian paratroopers hastily flew back, and a United Nations international military force was sent to restore order. When Lumumba was assassinated in 1961 (with evidence of American connivance), the troubled situation became even more volatile because of a threatened Soviet-Western confrontation. The Soviets charged the Europeans and their American supporters with deliberately creating the chaos so that the Europeans might return.

The Shaba secession was halted, but the government with Belgian and American support continued to battle leftist rebels. Eventually, in 1965, Colonel Joseph Desire Mobutu established a dictatorship that would last for the next 32 years. He at once nationalized the large mining enterprises and other parts of the economy. To symbolize the new era, all geographical and personal names were Africanized. He himself took the name Mobutu Sese Seko. The country became Zaire, as did the famous river. The capital city of Leopoldville and the second largest city, Stanleyville, both carrying names reminiscent of European imperialism, became Kinshasa and Kisangani; Lake Albert became Lake Mobutu.

Zaire, the third largest country in size in Africa (second only to Sudan and Algeria), its cities widely separated and with poor, overgrown roads, had vast copper, diamond, cobalt, and other mineral resources; but its potential riches remained undeveloped and Mobutu’s extravagances over the years drove the country to the brink of economic ruin. By his last years it had fallen heavily into debt, was dependent on imported food, and had become increasingly corrupt. The United States, to prevent the expansion of Communist influence, continued its financial assistance and used the country as a base for operations against neighboring countries like Angola, where leftist regimes were fighting to establish themselves.

When in 1987 Mobutu could no longer count on American support, he met his mounting domestic opposition by agreeing to multiparty elections, but he ignored the results and continued his dictatorial rule over the next several years. Meanwhile guerrilla forces, the principal one led by Laurent Kabila, with support from Zaire’s neighbors, Rwanda and Uganda, gathered strength and in 1996 swept through the country in a seven-month campaign, meeting little resistance. Kabila’s forces gained control of the capital in 1997 and forced Mobutu to flee. Zaire officially became the Democratic Republic of Congo. One of the most repressive, corrupt, and ruthless dictatorships of postcolonial Africa came to an ignominious end and Mobutu died in exile a few months later.

But the country’s troubles were not over. Satisfaction over Mobutu’s downfall faded when Kabila, assuming a dictatorial role himself, banned all political parties except his own, arrested rival opposition leaders, and refused to permit a UN-sponsored human rights investigation into the repressive actions of his army. Because he relied on troops from neighboring countries and made no effort to build a national army, many in the country came to view him as a puppet of neighboring states who were eager to pillage Congo’s vast resources. Because Kabila’s weak hold on power disturbed his former allies, Rwanda and Uganda opened a military campaign to overthrow him and soon controlled half the country. By 2000 five separate nations had armed forces warring in Congo, supporting or opposing Kabila, and Rwanda and Uganda were fighting each other. The following year Kabila was assassinated, and a hasty effort was made to provide stability by swearing in his son as his successor. Foreign troops gradually withdrew from the country, but a civil war continued until UN peacekeepers and a tenuous truce agreement brought an end to most of the violence in 2003. President Joseph Kabila remained in office, but elections were postponed and the Democratic Republic of Congo was still far from achieving democratization or peace in the first decade of the new century—as in so many of the other African states that had emerged from European empires during the 1960s.

Burundi and Rwanda

Belgium, which had governed colonial Congo directly, had also administered under a League mandate and a UN trusteeship two small territories that had been part of German East Africa before 1914. In 1962 they became the independent states of Burundi and Rwanda. Both were predominantly Christian, divided between Roman Catholics and Anglicans. Although the two states went their separate ways, there were many parallels. Long-standing tensions between the dominant Tutsi minority and a resentful Hutu majority, partly a legacy of colonial policies, had led to power struggles and internecine warfare over the years but nothing comparable to the tragic events that took place in the mid-1990s.

The Hutu, a Bantu people, the original settlers, were agricultural farmers. The Tutsi (or Watusi) arrived, possibly from Ethiopia, in the late fifteenth century. A tall warrior people who were cattle herders, they came to dominate the more numerous Hutu who worked the land for them in a kind of semifeudal relation. The German and later the Belgian colonial administrators favored the Tutsi, treating them as an elite group and enlisting their assistance in governing. After the Second World War, however, a new generation of Belgian administrators shifted to the view of redressing the balance in favor of the Hutu majority. When independence came, the Tutsi were still in control of the army and government, but the Hutu saw an opportunity to avenge themselves for the years of subjugation.

In Burundi a series of conflicts between the Tutsi-controlled government and Hutu rebels led to ethnic violence that killed thousands of people, Tutsi and Hutu alike, in the 1970s and early 1980s. Tutsi military regimes succeeded one another. In 1987 one such regime pledged itself to work for ethnic reconciliation and in 1993 allowed presidential elections. A Hutu, the first ever, was elected president. His efforts to form a stable, ethnically balanced government proved difficult. In Rwanda, meanwhile, similar efforts at reconciliation had led to the election of a Hutu president who proceeded to show good faith by appointing Tutsi ministers to the cabinet. In April 1994 an unexpected catastrophe occurred. A plane carrying the Hutu presidents of Burundi and Rwanda returning from a conference was shot down under mysterious circumstances, killing both presidents.

In Rwanda the event set off a wild outburst of revenge by Hutu extremists, who broadcast radio calls for a wholesale massacre of Tutsi. In a few weeks’ time over a half million Tutsi were killed, along with Hutu moderates who refused to go along. The killings were accompanied by all kinds of atrocities. Men, women, and children seeking refuge in churches were tracked down and slain, at times with the complicity of Hutu Roman Catholic and Anglican clergy. The international community, meanwhile, stood aside while the massacres went on unchecked. The worst carnage ended when Tutsi armed exiles, many of whom had been living in Uganda, swept back into the country, subdued the Hutu extremists, and reestablished a government pledged to work out some form of reconciliation.

But armed Hutu extremists in considerable numbers had fled to the eastern borderlands of neighboring Congo, and Rwanda became enmeshed in Congo’s civil war, which soon turned into a regional multinational war.

All these events posed problems for the international community. It could not intervene in all cases of civil war to prevent human rights atrocities, but there was wide agreement that some middle ground had to be found between international intervention and the almost complete failure to act during the racist brutality and wholesale slaughter in Rwanda in 1994 that could justifiably be called genocide. Meanwhile, the Rwandan political situation began to stabilize. The Tutsi leader Paul Kagame was elected president in 2003, and in 2005 the largest group of Hutu rebels (many of whom were still in the Democratic Republic of the Congo) decided to end its armed campaign against the government. But the mass murder of the mid-1990s remained a haunting memory for the whole world as well as an impediment to full reconciliation within Rwanda itself.

End of the Portuguese Colonial Empire

Of all the colonial powers Portugal, itself under authoritarian dictatorship until 1974, clung longest to its colonies, symbols of grandeur from the days of Vasco da Gama’s explorations and the early age of European expansion. To retain Angola, on the southwestern African coast, and Mozambique, on the southeastern, both of which at one time had been flourishing centers of the slave trade and had been under Portuguese rule for over 400 years, the Portuguese dictatorship stubbornly suppressed anticolonial revolts which broke out in 1961. It was in the course of the fighting that disaffected officers and soldiers in the army, radicalized by the prolonged colonial war, turned against the Portuguese regime and overthrew it in 1974. The following year Portugal granted independence to Angola, Mozambique, and its smaller African colonies. Hundreds of thousands of Portuguese fled.

In Angola independence touched off a struggle for power by competing groups in which outside powers intervened—the Soviet Union and Cuba on the one side; the United States and South Africa, still under its apartheid regime, on the other. The Soviet bloc provided weapons and advisers to a Marxist faction, and the Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, who projected himself as a Marxist-Leninist defender of oppressed colonial peoples everywhere, dispatched 50,000 troops. Although the leftist group won out, proclaiming a “people’s republic” in 1976, anti-Communist rebel groups with the support of the United States and South Africa continued the struggle. The war dragged on and cost hundreds of thousands of lives. Not until the early 1990s did the outside powers withdraw, the arduous task of economic reconstruction begin, and UN-supervised elections take place, but violence continued until antigovernment rebels finally agreed to a cease-fire after the death of a key rebel leader in 2002.

Mozambique, also a “people’s republic,” became engaged for the next 16 years in similar fighting with a militant rightist insurgency. The continuing wars and natural disasters such as drought and famine cost the small country over half a million lives and created 1 1/2 million refugees. Both Angola and Mozambique gradually abandoned Marxism, loosened economic controls, and turned to the West for desperately needed economic assistance; and both countries were still struggling to recover from their internal wars, even in the first decade of the twenty-first century.

Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia, and Sudan

The postcolonial campaign to establish stable governments evolved fitfully over many years in northeastern Africa, where Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia had all formed part of Italy’s short-lived East African empire. Italian armies, which had occupied Ethiopia after Mussolini invaded the country in 1936, were routed in the early years of the Second World War. Haile Selasse returned as emperor, but he was deposed by a military coup in 1974, whereupon Ethiopia became a client state of the Soviet Union in the Cold War conflicts of the era. The pro-Soviet regime was unable to defeat an Eritrean secessionist movement, however, and by 1993 a new Ethiopian government agreed to recognize the independent state of Eritrea on its northeastern border. Conflicts nevertheless continued to break out along this border in the 1990s, and both countries struggled with droughts, the movement of refugees, and recurring threats to peace and democratic political processes in the next century.

Political instability and internal violence also troubled the postindependence history of neighboring Somalia, which had been partly under Italian control before 1914 and eventually under a UN trusteeship before becoming an independent state in 1960. Somalian governments later sent troops into Ethiopia during the period of the Soviet-Ethiopian alliance (seeking control of an area where many Somalians lived), but this intervention failed. Somalia was subsequently disrupted by ongoing rivalries among competing “war lords,” who resisted both a strong centralized government and the creation of democratic institutions. Although Somalia would come to be viewed as a dangerous transit point for radical Islamic militants and other anti-Western groups, neither American troops nor UN peacekeeping forces were able to establish political order during their intervention in the 1990s; and regional war lords would continue to dominate Soma-ha in the first decade of the new century. The American setback in Somalia for a time reinforced American reluctance to intervene in troubled areas elsewhere, including Rwanda.

The largest country in Africa, Sudan, entered its own era of internal violence as it gained independence from joint English-Egyptian rule in the late 1950s. The black population in southern Sudan, who were mainly Christian or followers of traditional animist faiths, rose in rebellion against the Arab government in the north, which sought to impose Islamic law on the entire country. Religious and ethnic violence dominated Sudanese life, throughout much of the later twentieth century, as people in southern or western Sudan resisted the Islamic regime and as militia groups allied with the central government waged campaigns of violence, rape, and land appropriation. Although rebel groups in southern Sudan finally signed a peace accord with the government in early 2005, the situation was destabilized when the principal southern leader was killed in an accident. Meanwhile, the non-Arab, black peoples in the western Sudanese territory of Darfur came under widespread attacks from Arab militias, whose murderous destruction of whole villages (with the apparent sanction of the Sudanese government) was widely condemned by the international community in 2004-2005.

The recurring wars, government repression, famine, and drought thus kept most of the population of Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia, and Sudan in a vulnerable, impoverished condition. The turmoil also displaced a steady stream of refugees and precluded the kind of sustained economic development that was needed to support more stable political institutions.

The African Revolution

The preceding summary of postcolonial African history has stressed political and social conflicts that developed in the former European colonies, but it would be wrong to assume that the African Revolution was only a story of violence and disappointments. Independence provided a deep source of self-esteem. The word uhuru, freedom, rang through the continent in the heady days of decolonization. Léopold Senghor, the poet-president of the formerly French colony of Senegal, gave voice to the idea of nigritude, a powerful far-reaching black self-consciousness and pride in ancient cultural roots. This new pride spread far beyond the African continent itself, striking a responsive chord in North and South Americans of African descent whose ancestors had been brought in chains from lands that were now modern sovereign states. Black Africa exulted when the Nigerian playwright, poet, and novelist Wole Soyinka, who blended Yoruba and Western traditions in his writings, received the Nobel Prize for literature in 1986. Meanwhile Chinua Achebe’s novel about Nigeria during the early years of European colonialism, Things Fall Apart (1959), entered the canon of world literature.

The African revolution ended Western colonialism and ushered in a new era of independence and national sovereignty, but it did not automatically bring democratic government, civil and human rights, the resolution of ethnic and regional antagonisms (some of which were the residue of Europe’s colonial policies and arbitrary boundary divisions), or a meaningful improvement in the quality of human lives. In the countryside ethnic loyalties often transcended national loyalties. Natural disasters, drought and floods, eroding soil, and diseases added to the continent’s tribulations, which derived also from the fact that African agriculture and other economic activities remained hostage to world price fluctuations.

The social and economic situation was often grim. At the end of the twentieth century close to one-half of sub-Saharan Africa’s population of 600 million survived on less than $1 a day. The continent’s debt burdens amounted collectively to $200 billion. Many of the world’s older infectious diseases such as malaria and many childhood diseases were still prevalent. The death toll from AIDS and the rate of infection from the HIV virus was devastating. Of the 36 million people in the world living with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, over two-thirds were in sub-Saharan Africa. Some 15 million Africans had already died from it, and 11 million had been left orphans. Scientists and others agreed that AIDS could well be the most serious infectious disease in recorded human history. For Africa it was described as the worst social disaster since the slave trade. Abroad-based campaign to control the pandemic thus gained international support at the beginning of the twenty-first century—in part because of the widespread human suffering and in part because the hard-won gains in development, economic growth, and quality of life were in danger of reversal.

The new states began independence with constitutions, elected parliaments, independent judiciaries, and formal guarantees of civil liberties. But under the pressure of ethnic conflict, economic burdens, and political instability, the machinery of constitutional government quickly succumbed to dictatorship, generally military. In country after country, generals, admirals, colonels, majors, and officers of lesser rank pushed aside the civilian rulers. The warrior caste, often a law unto themselves, became the accomplices and tools of the new rulers, tyrannizing the population. Nigeria, which at least made sporadic efforts to preserve constitutional government (and its federal system for the multiethnic state), counted six military coups in the years from 1966 to 1985. Of over 150 African heads of state in the first three decades of independence, only six voluntarily relinquished their offices, and most presided over governments that were repressive, corrupt, and tyrannical. Until the late 1980s there were few examples of free elections, multiparty systems, political pluralism, orderly changes of government, or freedom from censorship.

But in the late 1980s and in the 1990s the spread of democracy worldwide caught up in Africa as well. By 1999,32 of 53 African states had free or partly free elections of some credibility, and this trend continued into the new century. The orderly election and presidency in South Africa of Nelson Mandela and the transition to his successor provided reassurances of South Africa’s democratic progress. Nigeria ended years of repressive and corrupt military rule when the country was restored to civilian rule. A new generation of leaders paid increasing attention to health care, education, and women’s needs and rights. In the 1990s more than 30 sub-Saharan countries adopted economic reforms liberalizing trade and investment, stabilizing currencies, and privatizing cumbersome and wasteful state enterprises. A small group of states showed economic growth rates of over 6 percent. The Organization of African Unity pledged to punish with economic sanctions any African government that came to power by military coup.

Yet talk of an African renaissance could not ignore the continent’s continuing social and economic crises. In the early twenty-first century sub-Saharan countries still filled all the bottom ranks in global tables of economic growth. Fewer than half of young Africans were attending schools, and the economic gap between Africa and the rest of the world was widening.

No single theory could explain African problems. Some pointed to nineteenth-century European imperialist rule and exploitation as the root cause. Colonial rule lasted only a few generations but perhaps long enough to undermine African societies and institutions or to hinder the development of autonomous new ways of life. Above all, it had undeniably eroded African confidence and experience in self-governing institutions. On the other hand, postcolonial failure seemed to be largely a failure of political leadership. When the European colonial rulers departed, they left highly centralized authoritarian states in the hands of small elite groups with little political experience. Europeans had established colonies like the Belgian Congo to be exploited for profit, and their postcolonial African successors often followed in the same path. The new rulers transformed the national independence party into the sole or dominant government party. Although ostensibly opposed to ethnic separatism, the political leaders often manipulated ethnic rivalries to enhance their own power. The Cold War also contributed to the setback of democracy in that the Western-Soviet competition for client states led to the support of dictators. American policy was designed to win and retain reliable allies in the fight against communism, and the Americans applied no litmus tests of democracy before giving financial aid. In the 1980s, for example, the four largest African recipients of American economic aid were the rightist dictators in Liberia, Somalia, and Zaire, and the anti-Communist rebel leader in Angola.

The key question for much of the African continent was how to anticipate and prevent crises leading to war, a goal that required institutional safeguards to ensure that the military remained subordinate and accountable to civilian authority. For the outside world the question was how to provide economic assistance that would be used constructively and improve the quality of life for all.

Some Africans argued that to counter separatist ethnic and regional forces, cope with economic underdevelopment, and provide the cohesion necessary for national unity, strong, single-party governments were more effective than multiparty democratic systems. President Museveni, who had accomplished so much in Uganda to overcome the chaos and torment of the early years of independence, put his concept of a “noparty democracy” to a referendum in 2000, and voters accepted his recommendation that what he called “the Movement” be the sole governing party. Western-style democracy was still difficult to nurture in societies with high rates of illiteracy or disease, a small middle class, and cultural traditions of lifetime tenure for chiefs and kings. But other Africans rejected such arguments and maintained that they should choose and control their rulers, and the governments they lived under, and one day would do so.

Many of the African states for a time were professedly Marxist. They spoke of “African socialism” and styled their regimes “people’s democratic republics.” In Mozambique the main avenues were named for Lenin and Mao Zedong; the flag of the People’s Republic of the Congo (in colonial times the French Congo) flying in Brazzaville displayed a hammer and sickle. Such regimes turned away from free enterprise, which they identified with the profit-making, exploitation, and racial humiliation of Western colonialism. They looked to government, public ownership, and centralized planning to oversee new economic structures that would hasten development and provide a more egalitarian society. They nationalized their industries and collectivized agriculture. In the years of the Cold War many of these countries received technical and material assistance from the U.S.S.R., the Soviet bloc, and the People’s Republic of China. But rigid state control and overly centralized planning (as in the Communist countries themselves) led to economic stagnation and corruption.

Once self-sufficient in food, Africa after 1964 became an importer of food. Wars and preparations for wars were costly, so that expenditures on arms often exceeded the international financial assistance received for economic development. Yet in spite of the painfully slow progress in improving the quality of life, Africans in the first generations of independence felt a new sense of control over their own destiny. They were not eager to cast themselves in the Western democratic image or simply to follow Western economic models, although globalization might well limit or preclude other options. Economic growth was nevertheless a prerequisite to survival and to the improvement of human lives, as were political stability and peace. African nations were still moving toward these often elusive goals almost a half-century after independence.

118. FERMENT IN THE MIDDLE EAST

The Islamic and the Arab World

In the Islamic, or Muslim, world, the age of colonial domination also ended, and a powerful renewed sense of identity emerged. Much of the Islamic world was determined to share in modernization and material advances, but many Muslims wanted to develop or reform their societies without assimilating Western cultural patterns. Religious and cultural traditions slowed the pace of modernization or influenced emerging new institutions. An elitist organization of society, traditional obstacles to full equality for women, and widespread illiteracy presented powerful obstacles to social change. The 40 or so identifiable Islamic countries, Arab and non-Arab, differed vastly from each other so that the Islamic world had no single sense of identity; Sunni and Shiite Muslims were often in conflict and sometimes in violent confrontation with each other. Although the pace of transformation was uneven, older life styles were being undermined everywhere. In many cases strong tensions developed as Islamic traditionalists resisted secular changes. Turkey made a concerted effort to protect the secular society decreed by its founder, Kemal Atatürk; but elsewhere, in Saudi Arabia, Iran, Afghanistan, Sudan, and other countries, Islamic fundamentalism created virtual theocracies.

The heartland of Islam was the Arab world and the Arabian peninsula, where the Muslim religion was founded by Muhammad in the seventh century, but under the caliphs who succeeded Muhammad and who commanded both religious and secular authority, Islam had swept from the Arabian peninsula into non-Arab lands. Turks and other non-Arab peoples who were converted to Islam continued the expansion. The Ottoman Empire, founded by the Ottoman Turks, ruled at its height in the sixteenth century over Arab and non-Arab peoples and included Palestine, with sites holy to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. When the empire gradually disintegrated in the modern centuries, the Europeans expanded their economic and political influence in the Middle East. From the Ottoman Empire emerged many of the states of the contemporary Muslim world, Arab and non-Arab, at first as international trusteeships and mandates and then as independent nations.

The term “Middle East” itself is imprecise but widely used. For the Europeans who coined the term it meant the geographic area midway between Europe and East Asia, but “Middle East” is used now to designate that part of the world that is predominantly Islamic in religion and culture stretching from the states of North Africa to Western Asia. The major non-Arab Muslim states include Indonesia (with the world’s largest Islamic population), Malaysia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, and Iran (the only country where the Shiite rather than the Sunni branch of Islam prevails).[2] The Islamic world also includes a half-dozen states in central Asia in the former Soviet Union. Millions of Muslims, non-Arab and Arab, also live in India, in Africa, in the Balkans, and increasingly in western Europe and the United States. At the opening of the twenty-first century there were about 1.1 billion Muslims, or close to one-fifth the world’s population, second in numbers only to Christianity in all its branches.

[2] The schism originated in an armed struggle over the succession to Muhammad after the prophet’s death in 632, in which the Shiite faction supported Ali, Muhammad’s son-in-law, and the Sunni favored another line of succession. The schism became permanent. There are also differences in doctrine and ritual between the two important divisions. The Shiite form of Islam became the state religion in Persia (Iran) in the sixteenth century and has remained dominant in Iran, but there are important Shiite communities in Iraq, Pakistan, Yemen, and elsewhere.

About one-fifth of the world’s Muslims, or some 200 million, are Arabs, that is, people whose primary language is Arabic. Because the language of the Qur’an (or Koran), used in the religious practices of Muslims worldwide, is Arabic, it is in a sense the second language of non-Arab Muslims as well. The Arab states stretch from the Atlantic coast of North Africa to the Persian Gulf, from Morocco to Iraq.[3] In that part of the Middle East lies a large part of the world’s petroleum reserves on which the economic activity of the industrial world depends, and the region has been one of the modern world’s most troubled areas.

[3] The principal Arab states are Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, in North Africa; Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and Iraq (Israel’s neighbors), close to the eastern Mediterranean; and Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, and Kuwait, in the Arabian peninsula.

The Arab states that emerged from the collapse of the Ottoman Empire at the end of the First World War became League of Nations mandates under British or French administration, with the expectation of one day receiving independence. Egypt became nominally independent in 1922 and Iraq, in 1932, although the British retained treaty rights in each until after 1945. The other Arab states became independent during or after the Second World War, when the British and French ended their mandates. In 1945 Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Jordan formed the influential League of Arab States, or Arab League. Libya, after gaining independence in 1951, also became a member. In the decades that followed, newly independent Arab states as well as the Palestinian National Authority joined so that it grew to have 22 members by the end of the twentieth century.

The unity of the Arab world is more fragile than often thought. Divisive rivalries persist. The pan-Arabism advocated by Egypt’s Colonel Nasser in the 1950s and Libya’s Colonel Qaddafi in the 1980s failed to rally lasting support. A United Arab Republic joining Egypt and Syria in 1958 was short-lived. After the Second World War, however, the Arab states found common cause in their opposition to the state of Israel, which itself had emerged as a new sovereign state in the Middle East in 1948. The Arab states viewed Israel as a Western-backed intrusion into their land, and the result was a series of continuing tensions and conflicts that frequently brought wider international forces into play.

The Emergence of Israel

Zionism, evolving in the late nineteenth century as a response to European anti-Semitism, became a movement to establish (or reestablish) a Jewish homeland in Palestine, then part of the Ottoman Empire. A small number of Jewish pioneers from Russia and eastern Europe made their way to Palestine before 1914. During the First World War, while at war with the Ottoman Empire, the British by the Balfour Declaration of 1917 voiced support for “a Jewish homeland in Palestine” but in other ways supported emergent Arab nationalism. In 1923, after the demise of the Ottoman Empire, the British received a League of Nations mandate for Palestine, and a growing number of Jewish settlers arrived in the 1920s and 1930s.

The whole question of Palestine poignantly reemerged at the end of the Second World War when the homeless survivors of the Nazi Holocaust, which had all but wiped out central and eastern Europe’s Jews, sought out Palestine as a place of refuge. But in deference to Arab protests the British limited immigration and turned away whole shiploads of refugees. The Jewish leaders pressed their cause with the United Nations and sympathetic American political circles and contested the British restrictions, at times resorting even to terrorist activities directed against the British. In 1947 the United Nations in a vote supported by both the United States and the Soviet Union recommended partition of Palestine into two parts: a Jewish sector and an Arab sector, with the area around Jerusalem under international control.

The Arabs, who had boycotted the UN committee hearings, rejected the partition, complaining that they were being asked to make sacrifices for Europe’s persecution of the Jews. Both sides prepared for conflict. On May 14, 1948, when the Zionist leaders proclaimed the Republic of Israel, Israel’s five Arab neighbors—Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, and Iraq—refused recognition and invaded the new state. The Israelis (as the citizens of the new republic called themselves) not only defended themselves but also counterattacked. In the course of the fighting at least 600,000 Palestinian Arabs fled, or were forced by the Israelis to flee, to Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and other Arab states. During the war Jordan took over the West Bank of the Jordan River, and part of Jerusalem and Egypt took the Gaza Strip, but elsewhere Israel gained territory.

By the end of hostilities and the armistice of 1949 Israel had increased its originally allotted land by about half. Jerusalem came under divided control. The plan for international control was abandoned. Jordan now governed East Jerusalem, but Israel retained control of West Jerusalem. The Arab states, unwilling to negotiate peace or even recognize the existence of Israel as a sovereign state, made little effort to absorb the Palestinian refugees who had fled to the Arab states and who continued to live in overcrowded, squalid refugee camps for decades to come.

The New State of Israel

The Israelis saw themselves as creating a Jewish homeland after the Holocaust, so that persecuted Jews would never again be without a refuge. Under a Law of Return Jewish immigrants from anywhere in the diaspora were automatically entitled to citizenship. Secular-minded founders of the state like David Ben-Gurion did not define the role of religion too closely. Freedom of religion and freedom of conscience were equally to be protected, but rabbinical authorities were to control such matters as marriage and divorce, definitions of Jewishness, and observance of the Sabbath. Ultra-Orthodox Jews eventually came to exert influence out of proportion to their numbers and to create a larger political voice for themselves than originally envisaged.

After independence Israel over the years built a modern, Western-style, urban, industrial society with a democratically elected parliament, the Knesset, and a lively political culture. For many years the moderately socialist Labor party governed. The country provided a large role for labor unions and agricultural cooperatives (famous as kibbutzim), extensive health and educational services, and support for scientific and technological research. About half the economy was government-controlled until a later shift to privatization.

Economic development took off swiftly. Through ingeniously engineered irrigation schemes the Israelis reclaimed vast stretches of the Negev desert. The amount of land under cultivation more than doubled. In 1948 Israel produced only one-third of its food; by the early 1970s it was producing enough to meet almost all of its domestic needs and began to export. Industry expanded. Before long the Israelis exported electronic products, precision instruments, and military hardware. Extensive foreign investment, especially from the United States, further stimulated economic development. Living standards exceeded those of other countries in the Middle East and compared favorably to those of western Europe.

Over 2 million immigrants arrived in the decades after 1948. Many Jews arrived from the Arab states in North Africa and from Arab and non-Arab Muslim states in Asia, forced to abandon established communities where their families had lived for centuries but where Jews were now persecuted. From 1989 to 1992 about 400,000 Soviet Jews, finally permitted by the Soviet government to migrate, reached Israel. The population of 870,000 in 1948 reached about 5,750,000 by the opening of the twenty-first century. In the 1990s problems of unemployment, housing shortages, and a lack of skilled jobs surfaced, especially for the former Soviet Jews. At great financial strain, but benefiting from American foreign aid, the Israelis also developed powerful modern military forces and air power. They built nuclear reactors for the production of electric power and quietly created a nuclear military capacity.

The Arab-lsraeli Wars after Independence

Four more Arab-lsraeli wars were fought after 1948-1949, one in each of the next four decades, in 1956, 1967, 1973, and 1982. Israel, with Britain and France as allies, went to war with Egypt in 1956 when Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal and attempted to bar Israeli shipping. In 1967 Israel waged the Six-Day War against Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, when Egypt moved to close the Gulf of Aqaba to Israel, which would have strangled the Israeli economy. The outcome of the brief fighting in 1967 was momentous. After defeating the three Arab armies, Israel took from Jordan the West Bank of the Jordan River and East Jerusalem; from Syria, the Golan Heights (from which the Syrians had been able to shell Israeli settlements); and from Egypt, the Sinai Peninsula and Gaza Strip. Israel emerged with territory four times its original size; a rapidly growing population of over 1 million additional Arabs came under Israeli rule. The Israeli occupation of Palestinian towns and the later development of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories provoked the further development of Palestinian nationalism, new demands for an independent Palestinian state, and the emergence of radical Palestinian groups that began to launch terrorist attacks against Israel.

The next war broke out in 1973 when Egyptian and Syrian forces attacked the Israelis on the Jewish holy day Yom Kippur. Israel recovered from the surprise attack, defeated the Syrian army, and trapped the Egyptian forces in the Sinai Peninsula. With the Israelis near victory and in control of additional Arab territory, the League of Arab States suddenly introduced a new strategic weapon in support of Egypt and Syria, an embargo on oil shipments. Although the embargo was lifted a few months later, early in 1974, the oil-producing nations had quadrupled the price of oil, with global economic consequences far beyond the conflict in the Middle East. Meanwhile, the war ended with an American-mediated settlement. Israel withdrew from the west bank of the Suez Canal, but continued to occupy most of the Sinai Peninsula.

In 1982 Israel invaded war-tom Lebanon, where a divisive civil war had created virtual anarchy in Lebanese society. Israel had become the target of repeated raids from Lebanese territory organized by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and by guerrilla forces of Islamic sects armed by Islamic states, including Syria, Iraq, and Iran. Israeli forces pushed as far north as Beirut, forced the expulsion of the PLO, and then withdrew, although continuing for many years to hold a narrow security zone in southern Lebanon. No brief summary of these wars can convey the grief and suffering that each brought to the Israelis, the Palestinians, and the people in neighboring Arab states.

The Middle East became a theater of Cold War rivalries as well. The United States had disapproved of the British-French-Israeli Suez Canal intervention in 1956, but after that crisis it generally supported Israel and also provided extensive economic assistance. France, originally a staunch Israeli ally, for a time turned against Israel when de Gaulle in the 1960s decided he needed to help restore a balance of power in the region by supporting the Arab states. The U.S.S.R., one of the original backers of the Jewish state, reversed itself and sent arms to Egypt and other Arab states. The United Stales, following its Cold War strategy of containment, remained determined to prevent Soviet influence from expanding in the Middle East. The Eisenhower Doctrine, which pledged American support to countries in the Middle East resisting communism, was welcomed by Israel, while many of the Arab states resented it and looked to the Soviets for support—though they did not favor Communism within their own nations.

The Palestinian Arabs grew steadily more militant, conducting guerrilla warfare against Israel and engaging in terrorist activities within Israel and in other parts of the world. Under the leadership of Yasir Arafat, the PLO became a full member of the Arab League in 1964 and received recognition in many quarters as a government-in-exile for the Palestinian Arabs. The PLO professed to speak for all Palestinians, not only the 1.5 million under Israeli occupation but also those who had fled as refugees and who by this time numbered as many as 3 million. The PLO demanded the evacuation of all territories occupied by Israel after 1967 and called for the establishment of a sovereign independent Palestinian state in the West Bank of the Jordan River and the Gaza Strip, but the Israelis continued their occupation.

The Arab states meanwhile rejected proposals for a comprehensive peace agreement, condemning the post-1967 Israeli military occupation and even refusing to recognize Israel’s right to exist as a nation. In 1975 the Arab states persuaded the UN General Assembly, where the former colonial states of Asia and Africa now held a majority, to adopt a resolution condemning Zionism as a form of racism, even though Zionism had originated as a defense against anti-Semitism and Israel had been established, in part, as a response to the Nazi Holocaust. The resolution remained in effect until it was repealed in 1992.

Palestinian terrorist attacks within Israel and elsewhere altered the political scene in Israel itself. In 1977 Labor for the first time lost control of the government to a conservative, nationalist party of the center-right, Likud, founded by religious groups. Likud could govern only through coalitions, but it retained its parliamentary majority by receiving the support of the religious parties. The Israeli posture toward the Palestinians became more

intransigent. Menachem Begin as Likud prime minister encouraged Israelis to make permanent settlements in the occupied West Bank of the Jordan River (for which he even used the Biblical names of Judea and Samaria) and the Gaza Strip, and he rejected negotiations with the PLO. In 1980 the government unified the Israeli capital by unilaterally annexing East Jerusalem, which it had occupied since 1967.

Without a settlement new and even deadlier conflicts threatened to break out. At issue were the disposition of the territories occupied by Israel since 1967, the demand of the Palestinian Arabs for an independent national state, assistance to the Palestinian Arab refugees, and the recognition and guarantee of Israel’s legitimacy and security. The Egyptian president Anwar al-Sadat, recognizing the impasse and eager to recover lost Egyptian territory, broke the united Arab front against Israel when in 1978 he visited Israel and addressed the Knesset in Jerusalem. In 1979, with the United States acting as mediator, Sadat and Begin signed a peace treaty in Washington in the presence of President Carter. Israel agreed to withdraw from the Sinai Peninsula except for the Gaza Strip and was guaranteed the free use of the Suez Canal. Outraged at Sadat’s recognition of Israel’s legitimacy as a sovereign state, the other Arab states expelled Egypt from the Arab League. Sadat himself was later assassinated by Islamic extremists in his own army. His successor, President Mubarak, remained cautiously friendly to Israel, as did King Hussein of Jordan. Syria, Libya, and Iraq assumed the lead in rejecting any wider settlement. To thwart Iraq’s threatened nuclear capacity Israel in 1982 took the bold step of bombing a nuclear facility near Baghdad but meanwhile continued to build up its own unannounced nuclear capacity.

Israel, the Occupied Territories, and Peace Negotiations

In the 1980s over 1.5 million Palestinian Arabs lived in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, occupied by Israel since the 1967 war. At the end of 1987 nationalist agitation by young Palestinians flared up into a sustained uprising, the intifada, as it was called in Arabic. The Israeli military met the stone-throwing, firebombing, and civil disobedience with armed force, and casualties mounted. The suppression of the rebellion polarized Israel politically, hurt its economy, and threatened to undermine its democracy. The PLO exploited the popular uprising to press for recognition of an independent Palestinian state.

As the Cold War wound down in the late 1980s, the Arab states could no longer be certain of Soviet support, and the United States continued to encourage negotiations. Any genuine settlement would have to revolve around the formula “land for peace”: Israel to give up some or all of the territory occupied since 1967 in return for Arab recognition of Israel’s legitimacy and existence. The status of the Palestinians would have to be resolved in favor of some form of self-government or statehood. Israel’s continuing insecurity lay rooted in the fact that its small population lived in a hostile Middle East. A politically divided Israel, still haunted by Holocaust memories, feared for the nation’s security and the safety of its citizens. For some, territorial expansion was one answer. Begin’s successors continued the Likud party’s support for increased Jewish settlement in the occupied territories. Many other Israelis recognized the legitimate grievances of the Palestinian Arabs, accepting the fact that Jews and Arabs had to find ways to live together in the small land.

In 1992 the possibilities of peace negotiations with the Arabs revived when a Labor coalition formed a new government headed by Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres. Rabin halted additional settlements in the West Bank and reopened peace talks. Although official negotiations continued, it was secret talks carried on between Israelis and Palestinians in Oslo, Norway, outside regular diplomatic channels, that led in 1993 to an extraordinary agreement between Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat, which was signed in Washington at a ceremonial event with President Bill Clinton. Under the Oslo accords Israel recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization as the representative of the Palestinian people and agreed to initial steps for Palestinian self-government, including its own security forces. The PLO in turn recognized Israel’s legitimate existence as a sovereign state and agreed to abjure acts of violence. Despite many unresolved issues, Arab-Israeli relations seemed to be moving toward a settlement with the PLO, in which other Arab states might eventually join. In accordance with the agreement Israel withdrew its armed forces from most of the Gaza Strip and from Jericho in the West Bank and took steps to allow Palestinian self-rule under a “Palestinian National Authority” in the West Bank and in Gaza.

But intransigent groups on both sides began to derail the fragile agreement. Violence erupted again, and in 1995 a fanatical Jewish extremist assassinated Prime Minister Rabin. In 1996 Peres and the Labor coalition lost the elections to the hard-line Likud leader Benjamin Netanyahu, who immediately relaxed the freeze on new Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Even so, Netanyahu, yielding to pressure from the United States, met with Arafat in 1998 and agreed to carry out the Oslo agreement calling for surrender in stages of the occupied West Bank. Even these moderate concessions cost Netanyahu conservative and rightist support. Ehud Barak, a military man and former Israeli chief of staff, representing Labor, centrist, and some religious parties, campaigned on a pledge to move forward with peace negotiations and defeated Netanyahu in new elections. Under continuing American brokering, negotiations resumed. Israel began its withdrawal from the West Bank, and Barak, as he had promised, withdrew Israeli armed forces from its southern Lebanon security zone.

Barak also made overtures to Syria over the return of all or part of the Israeli-held Golan Heights. His concessions alarmed many Israelis and he lost his majority in the Knesset. Still determined to represent what he considered the popular will for peace, he nonetheless met once again with Arafat in Washington in July 2000, but the new talks foundered, principally over the status of Jerusalem. Despite all that had been offered him, Arafat insisted on his obligation to the entire Arab and Muslim world to claim sovereignty over East Jerusalem and its Muslim holy places and make it the capital of the Palestinian state. Violence erupted again. Arafat, the Israelis protested, seemed unable to control his people. A second intifada broke out in the streets of Jerusalem and rapidly spread, provoked initially by an unannounced visit to Muslim sites in East Jerusalem by the hard-line Ariel Sharon, a former top military commander in earlier wars, a determined opponent of Barak’s concessions, and now seeking to replace him. As Palestinian violence escalated, public opinion turned against Barak, and in early 2001 Sharon became prime minister by a sweeping popular vote. Many Israelis remained troubled. Some were willing to support the surrender of the occupied territories to the Palestinian Arabs and to work out compromises on the Israeli settlements and other issues. But many more believed that the concessions had gone too far. They too wanted peace but with firmer guarantees of security.

The opportunity for a peace settlement on the basis of the Oslo accords seemed to slip away, and the troubled region plunged into a new cycle of terrorist attacks, Israeli reprisals, and mounting casualties on both sides. The Israeli and Palestinian leaders, Sharon and Arafat, remained intransigent, but the impasse began to break after Arafat’s death in 2004. The Palestinian National Authority chose a more moderate president, Mahmoud Abbas, and progress seemed possible. The United States took a more active part in furthering a “road map” to peace; and Sharon removed Israeli settlers and troops from the Gaza Strip, ending the 38-year occupation of that small, crowded territory. At the same time, however, Sharon’s government built a controversial new wall along the border between Israeli and Palestinian lands (incorporating some formerly Palestinian land) and continued to support the extensive network of Jewish settlements that was interspersed among the territories of the Palestinian National Authority on the West Bank. The new Palestinian president was meanwhile unable to control the radical Hamas party (which won Palestinian parliamentary elections in 2006), and terrorist attacks by Palestinian extremists continued to cause death and disruption within Israel. The idea of exchanging “land for peace” had still not produced a general peace agreement, and Palestinian aspirations for a fully independent, stable nation-state had not yet become a political reality. Although the extremists on both sides were unwilling to compromise, most Israelis and Palestinians favored some kind of peaceful resolution to a conflict that had taken countless lives, disrupted economic life, and distorted political cultures in the entire region for more than five decades. Despite all the setbacks and the continuing violence, new political alignments in Israel offered a new promise of progress toward peace; but the “road map” did not lead directly or quickly to a comprehensive peace plan that the two sides would accept and implement.

Libya and Syria

Libya and Syria both added to the explosiveness in the Middle East. The discovery of oil in Libya in 1959 transformed a country of 4 million people into a leading petroleum producer. In 1969 Colonel Muhammar al-Qaddafi ousted the existing monarchy, established a personal dictatorship, and agitated for an extremist Arab nationalism. Using his country’s oil wealth for political purposes, he projected himself as a spokesman for pan-Arabism and aspired to a leadership role in African affairs as well. Libya became headquarters for terrorist activities in Europe and elsewhere. Neither economic sanctions nor even military reprisals deterred Qaddafi. In 1997 the United States officially included Libya on its short list of states actively sponsoring international terrorism. Qaddafi continued to hold dictatorial power into the twenty-first century, but he moved away from his earlier nationalist radicalism, renounced international terrorism, and abandoned efforts to develop and stockpile chemical weapons.

The early years of the Syrian Arab Republic were marked by extreme political instability and a succession of military coups. In 1963 one such coup brought the pan-Arab Baath party to power and led to a new one-party government. In 1971, in the tenth coup of its kind, Hafez al-Assad, a former defense minister, took power and ruled dictatorially for close to 30 years until his death in 2000. Assad ruthlessly suppressed all opposition, including an insurrection of the Muslim Brotherhood in 1982, in which his air force killed tens of thousands.

Assad remained one of the most resolute enemies of Israel, intent on recovering all the Arab territory lost since 1967, especially Syria’s strategic Golan Heights. In the chaotic civil war in Lebanon he had supported radical Arab militant sects and sent some 35,000 troops as a “peacekeeping force.” In the end, to the resentment of many Lebanese, he was virtually in control of Lebanon. At his death Assad’s son was quickly named the new president in a carefully prearranged succession. The new president, Bashar al-Assad, continued most of his father’s policies, but bowing to a popular uprising and international pressure he eventually withdrew Syrian troops from Lebanon. The Baath party meanwhile clung to power in Syria, even as war in neighboring Iraq threatened to spill over the Syrian border in the years after 2003.

119. REVOLUTION AND WAR IN THE PERSIAN GULF

The Revolution in Iran

Where change occurred rapidly in the Middle East, it was clear that traditionalists often resented the Westernizing influence of modern economic and cultural forces. They opposed secularism and the disruption of older religious and cultural institutions as a Western subversion. Yet the outside world was not prepared for the fierce anti-Westernism of the Islamic revolution that erupted in 1979, not in an Arab state, but in Iran, where the principal language was Persian (or Farsi). Iran was a Shiite state, whereas nine-tenths of the Islamic world adhered to the Sunni branch of Islam, but the Shiite revolutionary leaders in Iran helped to foment a new religious revivalism everywhere in the Muslim world.

Over the centuries Persia (or Iran, as it was known after 1935) had a long history of foreign domination. At the opening of the twentieth century, as we have seen, Britain and Russia, coveting its newly discovered oil resources, divided it into spheres of influence. After the First World War the British had tried to retain control, but in 1921 an army officer, Reza Khan, seized power, assumed the title of shah, or hereditary ruler, in 1925, and embarked on a program of modernization. During the Second World War, however, in 1941, when some of his machinations brought him threateningly close to the Axis, the British and Russians occupied the country and forced him to abdicate in favor of his son, Muhammad Reza. The young shah identified with the West.

After the war American influence became dominant. When Prime Minister Mossadegh and a leftist parliament moved to nationalize and control the oil industry in the early 1950s, the shah, with clandestine support from the American CIA, ousted him and blocked the attempt. With oil wealth and extensive American military and economic aid, the shah embarked upon an ambitious development program. He broke up estates controlled by feudal landowners and the Islamic clergy, reorganized the armed forces, and sent students in large numbers to study abroad. The pace and breadth of secularization and modernizing reforms pleased urban business and professional interests but alienated others, especially in the countryside. Moreover the shah presided over an increasingly authoritarian regime, crushing opposition and dissent with his secret police. His huge personal wealth also did not go unnoticed. The United States, pleased with the modernization of its anti-Soviet ally in a strategic part of the world, ignored the swelling internal restlessness. In 1978 religious-inspired protests and strikes and riots broke out as the opposition coalesced. A tidal wave of demonstrations forced the shah to flee the country in January 1979.

In February the aged leader of the religious community, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini (ayatollah is the highest rank in the Shiite religious hierarchy), returned from exile in Paris, where for the past 15 years he had been denouncing the shah’s pro-Western, anticlerical, and irreligious regime. He quickly assumed leadership of the revolution and proclaimed an “Islamic republic.” His newly formed revolutionary guards routed the shah’s troops. Supreme control rested with the ayatollah and his council of religious guardians, appointed to guarantee the new regime’s strict commitment to Islam and to ensure control of the revolution through a network of mosques.

The revolutionary authorities forcefully restored traditional Islamic ways of life. Women were ordered to wear the chador, the traditional long black dress covering them from head to toe. The necktie was outlawed for men, who were also encouraged to grow beards. The authorities banned Western music, classical and popular, from radio and television and enforced the Islamic prohibition on alcohol. Islamic law, to be interpreted by the clerics, took precedence over secular law. Soon revolutionary justice, in the form of drumhead trials and public execution for religious, moral, or political offenses, cost the lives of thousands. The ayatollah’s theocracy pushed aside moderate leaders, even those who had welcomed the overthrow of the shah. The first president was forced to flee into exile; the foreign minister was executed. The new regime imposed tight state control over the economy and nationalized many industries. In the chaos, oil production and revenues fell.

Militants, many of them university students, aroused to frenzied heights by the ayatollah’s fervid denunciations of the United States as “the great Satan,” took action on their own. Reacting to the admission of the ailing shah to the United States in the autumn of 1979, revolutionary guards and students seized the American embassy in Tehran in retaliation and held 50 American hostages for close to 15 months, demanding the return of the shah and his wealth to Iran. The hostage crisis weakened the administration of President Carter, and the failure of an ill-conceived rescue mission added to American humiliation.

The War between Iran and Iraq

Iran made no secret of its desire to establish a position of leadership in the Muslim world and to project its Shiite theocracy as a model for others. In 1980 war broke out when Iraq, its Arab neighbor to the west, launched an attack on Iranian territory. Iraq, rich in oil, was an aggressively nationalistic Arab state under a secular military regime headed by Saddam Hussein, who ruled as a dictator. His party, the Arab Baath party, was dedicated to Arab revival. A competing branch of the movement ruled in Syria. But ideology was less important to Hussein than the concentration of political power at home and the use of military power for national ends abroad.

The Ayatollah Khomeini had denounced Iraq both for persecuting its large Shiite community and for abandoning Islamic principles. The Shiites comprised a large majority of the Iraqi population, but the Sunni minority dominated the dictatorship and the Baath party. Both the Shiites and a sizable ethnic group, the Kurds, suffered brutal oppression and severe mistreatment under the Iraqi regime. The war itself erupted over a long-smoldering border dispute between the two states concerning a waterway that served as a vital outlet for Iraq to the Persian Gulf. Although awarded to Iraq by an international commission, it had fallen under Iran’s control. Iraq, seizing an opportunity to exploit the revolutionary turmoil in Iran and gambling on a quick victory, bombed Iranian oil fields in 1980, invaded Iran, and occupied the disputed territory. Iran rallied after the initial invasion, expelled the Iraqi forces from its borders in 1982, and pushed deep into Iraq, hoping to overthrow Hussein and his regime. When Iraq stiffened its defenses, Iran dispatched assault waves of young conscripts, reminiscent of warfare during the First World War. In one of the rare instances since that war, both sides also used poison gas on the battlefield. Iraq used it as well against its Kurdish minority, which it accused of collaborating with Iran.

As the war dragged on, it assumed a larger international dimension. The land war became a tanker war in the Persian Gulf, involving Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and other Arab Gulf states dependent on trade with the West and unsympathetic to Iran’s Shiite fundamentalism. Both Iran and Iraq attacked neutral shipping in the Persian Gulf to prevent arms deliveries. When the attacks threatened the flow of oil, the United States, supported by the British and French, stepped up its naval presence. The Western navies kept oil shipments flowing and reinforced what had become the continuing strategic objective of preserving Western influence in the Gulf.

By 1987 the Iranian counteroffensive had failed. In August 1988 Iran accepted a cease-fire. The eight-year war had cost tens of thousands of lives on both sides. The Iranian economy was in shambles; its armed forces were exhausted and depleted. The ayatollah’s appeal for a holy war had gone unheeded by other Muslim nations and had alienated the Arab Gulf states. But he retained a dedicated following in Iran and still sought to assert his authority in the Islamic world. His call to the Islamic faithful for the assassination of the novelist Salman Rushdie for allegedly blaspheming Muhammad in one of his books shocked the international community. After Khomeini’s death in 1989 moderate and pragmatic elements within the Islamic government urged economic reconstruction and the reestablishment of the country’s ties to the outside world. In 1992 a new president with moderate economic and foreign policies won a parliamentary majority. President Rafsanjani was able to restrain the most radical excesses of the revolution, but the nation now had a new spiritual leader. Ayatollah Ali Khameini, who retained paramount power.

Iran in the 1990s became a land of continuing paradoxes and contradictions. A dual power structure existed and the country was no longer a completely closed society or theocracy as in the revolutionary decade. The middle classes assumed an active economic life. There was outspoken criticism of clerical power. In 1997, when the religious authorities gave voters an even freer choice of presidential candidates, 70 percent of the voters (the voting age was 15) chose an even more reform-minded president, Muhammed Khatami. He was a cleric himself and a descendant of religious leaders, but he had a broad intellectual outlook and had studied and written on Western political philosophy. Khatami committed himself to political and economic reform, a civil society, the rule of law, and a freer atmosphere, including a free press. He and others like him believed that Islam and democracy were not incompatible. Yet he had to work within the religious system established by the revolution. The religious authorities controlled the military, the police, the courts, and much of the media, and even held a veto power over the eligibility of candidates for office. While the president called for dialogue with the outside world, the religious leaders kept up their denunciations of the West, America, and Israel. The president moved and spoke cautiously.

Meanwhile a new generation of liberal-minded clerics loosened their stranglehold. The stringent dress and behavior codes were relaxed. Globalization had its effect. Western consumer products were in demand, alcohol became available, and music from the outside world could now be heard. Women dressed as they wished in private circles even if they still wore head scarves and cloaks in public. President Khatami and his program received wide support, and he easily won election to a second term in 2001. Many Iranians, especially young people, recognized that without change the country faced economic stagnation and political isolation, and they resented the social and moral straitjacket in which they found themselves. Iranian theologians were themselves arguing that believers in Islam had to be free in their private lives from outside coercion and pressure.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1948-2005

               Republic of Israel is established; Arab states go to war against Israel
1948           Afrikaner Nationalist Party expands rigid racial segregation in South Africa through apartheid laws
1954-1962      Algerian nationalists wage war for independence from France
1956           Britain, France, and Israel attack Egypt after it nationalizes Suez Canal
1957           Ghana is the first British colony in Africa to win independence
June 1967      Six-Day War leads to Israel’s military occupation of Palestinian lands on West Bank of Jordan River and the Gaza Strip
1967-1970      In Nigeria Ibo secession movement in Biafra is suppressed
1971-1972      Idi Amin takes power in Uganda and begins expulsion of Asians
1973           Yom Kippur War: Egypt and Syria fight a new war with Israel; conflict leads to Arab oil embargo as a strategic geopolitical weapon
1979           Ayatollah Khomeini leads Islamic Revolution in Iran
1982           Israel invades Lebanon to suppress Palestinian guerrilla groups
1993           Oslo agreement between Palestinians and Israelis; recognizes Israel’s right to exist and a new Palestinian National Authority
1991           American military campaign drives Iraq’s Saddam Hussein from Kuwait
1994           First nonracial, democratic elections in South Africa; Nelson Mandela is elected president
1994           Hutus attack Tutsi communities in Rwanda, killing over 500,000 people
2000-2001      Palestinian uprising (intifada) erupts after breakdown of Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations
2004-2005      Death of Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat; Israel withdraws from Gaza Strip

Despite the growing support for a more liberal interpretation of Islam, Iran’s conservative clerics still retained a strong following in the country and exercised great political power, including control over candidates in elections. Many wanted to reimpose the Islamic orthodoxy of the revolutionary decade. President Khatami seemed more and more powerless. When he denounced the American intervention in Iraq, however, he expressed a sentiment in Iran that transcended all ideological lines. The Iranian presidential elections in 2005 did not offer voters a wide choice, yet the results of the elections were somewhat unexpected. The more moderate candidate lost decisively to the conservative young mayor of Tehran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who won support for his populist economic program but was also known for his strict adherence to conservative clerical values and for keeping faith with the Islamic revolution of 1979. Popular support for the conservatives seemed to grow stronger after the American-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 and after the United States led the international opposition to Iran’s development of nuclear capacities. Ironically, the American war in Iraq meanwhile accomplished two of Iran’s long-sought international objectives—the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and the political ascendancy of Iraq’s Shiite majority.

The Iranian population at large, envious of the economic growth and prosperity of the outside world, had increasingly supported the relaxed political order during the 1990s. Education, available only for the urban rich before 1979, was now widespread and included wide opportunities for women. In the 1990s the number of young women entering universities and training themselves for modern skills tripled. With government encouragement, the population grew from 34 million in 1976 to over 68 million in 2005.

The Iranian revolution raised the larger question of whether traditional Islamic values, rigidly enforced as they were in the revolutionary decade, could accommodate modernization, democracy, and a pluralist society. The revolution in Iran had unsettled the entire Islamic world, but if Iran were to succeed in following a more moderate course, it could perhaps temper Islamic extremism in other Muslim countries too. The new president, however, could set the clock back and revert to tightened clerical control over Iranian society. He was vehement in insisting on Iran’s nuclear rights and denouncing the Americans who had taken the lead in opposing them.

Iraq and the Persian Gulf War of 1990-1991

Iraq, for its part, emerged from the war with Iran with battle-seasoned armed forces but without real victory and with a troubled economy. Saddam Hussein was resolved to recoup his country’s economic fortunes. Unable to persuade the other oil-producing states, particularly Kuwait, to curb production and raise oil prices, he denounced his small Arab neighbor to the south, pressed vague territorial claims (going back to the Ottoman Empire and the British protectorate), and in August 1990 invaded and annexed Kuwait. Many in the West feared that he might move next against Saudi Arabia, expand his influence over the Persian Gulf, and acquire a stranglehold over the world’s oil resources.

President George Bush took the lead in winning support from the international community, including several Arab nations, and from the UN Security Council for economic sanctions against Iraq and for military measures if necessary. Over the next few months the United States with the support of a multinational Western and Arab coalition pursued a massive buildup in the deserts of Saudi Arabia. When Iraq refused to withdraw from Kuwait, the Americans and their allies unleashed in early 1991 a crushing air attack and followed with a ground assault, which quickly forced Iraq’s withdrawal. Operation Desert Storm was remarkably successful, but no effort was made to continue on to Baghdad to dislodge Hussein from power. In defiance of the cease-fire terms, Iraq over the next several years appeared to challenge the UN-imposed ban on the manufacture of nuclear, chemical, and other weapons of mass destruction and obstructed international inspection. Western governments believed at the time that Iraq was developing such weapons and could one day deploy them.

The maintenance of stability in this vital area of the Middle East with its many rivalries and competing interests remained critical not only for the states of the Persian Gulf, the Arab nations, and Israel but also for the international community as well. The installation of American military forces in Saudi Arabia after the Gulf War of 1991 contributed to the emergence of a new radical Islamic terrorist group called Al-Qaida. It was led by a wealthy Saudi exile, Osama bin Laden, who set up his secret headquarters first in Sudan and then in the mountains of Afghanistan. Al-Qaida proclaimed its violent intention to drive the United States from the “holy lands” of Islam, where Mecca and other Muslim holy places were located. The region thus remained a highly unsettled site of both religious and political tensions, and the new terrorist organization extended its reach to other parts of the world. Meanwhile some in the West called for Saddam Hussein’s removal from power in Iraq, while others worried that his removal could create a power vacuum and generate further instability. Sanctions were imposed on Iraq after the war in order to restrain Hussein’s military ambitions, but the economic restrictions brought more hardship to the Iraqi people than to the dictator. A later momentous American decision to overthrow the Iraqi regime would lead to a new war that would open in 2003—a conflict to which we shall return in Chapter 27.

Changes in the Middle East

The Islamic world in the Middle East was therefore in the midst of flux and ferment, caught between traditional social and religious beliefs and modern economic and cultural changes. Beginning with the Iranian revolution of 1979, a wave of religious radicalism had accelerated across the region.

Islamic fundamentalists rejected such ideas as separation of religion and state and challenged secular tenets. Many sought Islamic theocracies. Women were often the chief targets. Ostensibly to protect them from the dangers of the modern world, religious radicals demanded their segregation and deprived them of educational and vocational opportunities. During the 1990s, for example, Afghanistan fell victim to the extremist Taliban movement, which had emerged in control of the country after a long war, supported by the United States, against the Soviet Union. The Taliban government imposed the strictest forms of repression, refusing women the right to attend schools or work outside the home and enforcing rigid dress codes. For the population as a whole, they wished to mete out punishments in accordance with the sharia, the centuries-old Islamic legal code. Although it was shunned by virtually all other nations and government leaders, the Taliban-controlled Afghan society became an important meeting place for Islamic radicals who sought to introduce strict Islamic laws in their own countries.

In Egypt the government responded to religious extremism by outlawing the Muslim Brotherhood, which it held responsible for assassinations and other acts of violence. Yet Islamic leaders could rally thousands of young people in Cairo to force the secular government to drop the sponsorship of books considered blasphemous to Islam. In Turkey the army, guardians of the Turkish secular state, took measures against attempts to undermine its secular tradition. In Algeria, as we have seen, the military’s nullification of the Islamic party’s victory at the polls in 1991 led to the formation of armed militant groups that fell upon parts of the population with wholesale massacres. In Sudan the Islamic regime in the north continued its military campaign to enforce Islam on the entire country.

But cultural changes were also transforming many Islamic nations, as in Iran. Many Muslims favored an Islamic framework for society, but not a rigid Islamic state. Sentiment grew for more flexible interpretations of ancient Koranic law. In Saudi Arabia, where women could not drive cars or dine unaccompanied in public in the presence of men and where the authorities decreed ancient punishments like amputation for theft and beheading for more serious crimes, a new generation urged the modification of such practices. Egypt saw a remarkable breakthrough for women in 2000, when it enacted one of the Muslim world’s most far-reaching reforms of family law. Under the new law in Egypt a woman was henceforth free to divorce a husband with or without his consent. Reformers successfully argued that such reforms should be viewed as a modern updating of the equal rights accorded women by the Qur’an. When in Kuwait the emir decreed that women were eligible to vote and compete in elections, the courts and the legislature at first blocked the decree, but the Kuwaiti parliament eventually changed course and voted in 2005 to give political rights to women. Many of the cultural changes in law and social patterns were taking place in smaller Arab states like Kuwait.

The nations of the Middle East often lacked independent political parties and credible parliaments, and the region remained a stronghold of authoritarianism. Although elections were held, their outcomes were generally predictable. What did make a social and political difference, however, was the greater access to the outside world. Satellite television, the Internet, electronic communications, and close commercial interactions with the rest of the world had a powerful impact. The new era of globalization was opening horizons, and the world of Islam, from its heartland in the Arab countries to the far reaches of Africa and Asia was steadily evolving in new and diverse directions.

120. THE DEVELOPING WORLD

At the beginning of the twentieth century, or even in 1945, the sweeping nature and extent of the anticolonial revolution was unanticipated. At best the Western leaders of the colonial empires expected their colonies to evolve slowly toward self-government. The rapid and complete dissolution of the colonial systems was therefore astounding. The age of imperialism had been accompanied by exploitation, brutality, and degradation; and it left an enduring scar on subject peoples all over the globe. Yet paradoxically Western imperialism was also the instrument whereby many of the scientific, material, intellectual, and humanitarian achievements of the West spread to the rest of the world. The West no longer dominated these areas politically; but its culture, technology, and institutions carried a lasting impact. Industry, science, secularization, social mobility, the rule of law, the idea of individual freedom, and other new values or institutions created dislocations and tensions throughout much of the decolonized world. In some instances, as in Iran’s Islamic revolution and in radical Islamic or religious movements elsewhere, resentments at the Western intrusion exploded, but mostly there was hope that some amalgam could be forged of modernization and traditional values.

In few parts of the formerly colonial world did Western-style liberal and democratic institutions prevail during the early years of national independence. Economically, neither the newly independent nations nor the international assistance programs were able to raise per capita levels of agricultural and industrial production significantly. Illiteracy and disease persisted, and living standards still lagged behind those of the industrialized nations. Independence brought a new sense of dignity, but it did not automatically bring freedom, self-government, human rights, and the improvement of the human condition. In many parts of the world the campaign for political and economic liberalization did not begin to show results until the 1980s.

The Development Experience

The United States took the lead after 1945 in assisting the developing countries with money and technical aid, but other industrial countries, as they recovered from the Second World War, also committed growing shares of their annual gross national product (GNP) to development assistance. (By the early twenty-first century, the top ten nations making grants of international aid—ranked by gifts as a percentage of GNP—were all in Europe; the United States still gave the most money but its percentage of GNP ranked twentieth). International agencies provided additional funding and expertise. With modern science, technology, and financial assistance, it was believed that the developing countries could look forward to modernization, economic growth, and social progress. Many of the new leaders of the postcolonial nations, however, believed that central planning, nationalized economies, and government controls would accomplish these ends more rapidly. Nehru’s moderate socialism and economic planning in India provided one model. Others turned to the Communist models of the Soviet Union or China. Still others followed the Japanese example of private capitalism in partnership with government. South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong in Asia, adopting the Japanese pattern, industrialized and created remarkably successful export economies with high living standards for their people.

In the postwar decades international agencies helped finance projects for agriculture, industry, health, and education. The 1960s were the “development decade.” President Kennedy spoke of raising the “banner of hope” for the poor and hungry. Dams and wells, irrigation schemes, hydroelectric projects, factories and processing mills, and education at all levels became part of the program. Industrialization, it was believed, could end or reduce excessive dependence on imports. In agriculture a “Green Revolution” pioneered by agricultural scientists in the United States, involving the use of chemical fertilizers, new high-yield hybrids, and modern planting and harvesting techniques, enabled farmers to increase productivity. The initial results were promising. Many of the developing countries experienced significant progress, achieving targets of 5 to 6 percent growth annually; per capita income rose; infant mortality rates fell. In the 1960s it seemed possible to speak of “a revolution of rising expectations.”

But advances in the poorer nations did not bring much change in their relative global economic position. They still did not share proportionately in the industrial world’s spectacular postwar economic expansion, in the course of which per capita income in the wealthier nations tripled. The gap between richer and poorer nations widened rather than narrowed. Using the United Nations and other organizations as a forum, the developing nations in the late 1960s argued for a reshaping of the international economy—a “new international economic order”—to offer them greater access to the investment funds, technology, and markets of the West and to shift international financing from Western-dominated agencies like the World Bank to wider international control.

In the tensions of the Cold War the developing nations had formed a bloc of neutralist, nonaligned states. Beginning with 25 states in 1961, the Third World bloc steadily increased in numbers, and although it was non-aligned, it was always more critical of the wealthier West than of the Soviet Union. Because the states were situated mainly in the southern parts of the two hemispheres, their challenges to the wealthiest nations also assumed the configuration of a “north-south” contest.

The recession that began in 1974 brought a decline in international trade and a shrinkage of international assistance funds. In the 1980s, the developing countries staggered under heavy debts incurred during the earlier optimistic years. Oil-producing countries, particularly, had overcommitted themselves because they calculated on a continuing rise in oil prices, but oil prices either dropped or remained stagnant during most of the 1980s. Debt, principally to private commercial banks, soared, one-third of it owed by the four Latin American countries, Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, and Venezuela.

After five decades of the development experience, per capita income in the poorest countries had scarcely risen. Almost everywhere the agricultural sector had received a lower priority than the industrial. Agricultural production, even when it increased, often failed to keep up with explosive population growth. To earn the foreign exchange needed to finance the development of an industrial infrastructure, governments encouraged export crops and neglected the production of food for their own people—an agricultural economy was considered a sign of inferiority. Although the developing countries began building their own industries, many of their products failed to compete successfully either at home or in the world market. Much of the economic aid and foreign investment had been channeled to industrial projects in the capitals or other large cities, sometimes to nonproductive and extravagant showpieces.

In the rush for development, government control frequently led to clumsy bureaucracies, extravagance, and corruption. Many governments used development funds to boost national prestige and pride rather than to improve the economic conditions of their people. Inadequate assistance failed to help the rural poor, who sank into deeper poverty. Millions meanwhile fled the countryside for the presumed attractions of city life, only to face joblessness, live in congested shantytowns or slums, and breathe polluted air. Some industrial projects in the Third World were undertaken at enormous cost to the environment.

Changing Worlds and Persistent Problems

In the 1980s economic growth regressed. Forty-three developing countries finished the decade with a decline in per capita real income. The percentage of the world’s population living in poverty, slowly shrinking in earlier decades, rose again. Because of population growth, the numbers of the impoverished were far larger than before. As the twentieth century drew to a close well over one billion human beings lived in poverty, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East. Hundreds of millions suffered from disease and malnutrition.

The developing countries, of course, were far from homogeneous. The People’s Republic of China (generally not included as part of the Third World but occupying a separate and unique category of its own) continued to industrialize and modernize in its own way. The “little tigers” in East Asia built powerful export economies and raised living standards. In South Korea per capita income rose spectacularly in the years 1970 to 1990 from $270 to $5,400. India, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand as well as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico were all industrializing and modernizing. These nations, or at least large numbers of people within these nations, were leaving the Third World behind and forming an intermediate category of their own as “newly industrialized countries.” The oil-rich states of the Middle East and elsewhere had the potential, if they chose to do so, to turn their national wealth into the further modernization of their economies and societies. Meanwhile at the very bottom of the economic performance scale were the “least developed countries,” among them a number of sub-Saharan African states; Bangladesh in South Asia; and Haiti in the Western Hemisphere. Together they formed a kind of “Fourth World,” an impoverished group of hundreds of millions of people lacking bare necessities.

The countries with the greatest success in development had progressed within a framework of market economies, but the debate continued over the role of government in stimulating economic development. Even in the successful market economies, governments played a significant supporting role; and government support for schools, transportation, and infrastructure remained essential for all developing economies. In many of the poorer developing countries, however, the overriding presence of the state, government ownership and controls, bureaucratic interference, and imprudent fiscal policies had choked off growth and progress.

The maldistribution of wealth was particularly acute in nations where there were fewer goods and services to distribute and where they were often distributed with gross inequity between the elite who cultivated ever higher standards of luxury and the impoverished masses. Despite some success stories, the rising expectations and hopeful visions of the early postwar decades often turned into ever deeper frustrations for many of the world’s peoples. In point of fact at the opening of the twenty-first century there was no Third World. There were only two worlds, one relatively rich, one poor. And the relations between these worlds remained critically important in the evolving global economy.

Reappraising Development

In the closing years of the twentieth century a spirited debate emerged in development circles and international donor agencies about the nature and direction of development assistance. The discussions and criticisms attracted broad public attention and at times ignited confrontational street demonstrations. The major international lending agencies admitted the disappointing progress in reducing poverty and accepted their share in the blame. The number of people living in extreme poverty in the world, that is, surviving on $1 a day, fell only slightly, from 1.3 billion in 1990 to 1.2 billion at the end of the decade. In sub-Saharan Africa it had barely changed.

The two major international agencies, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), both under new leadership, acknowledged a need to shift from “growth and development” to a more explicit commitment to “poverty reduction.” Over the years the World Bank had generously financed the building of roads, dams, bridges, and power plants, judging their success solely in quantitative terms, asking only, to cite one example, how much new electricity a project had generated but failing to ask how it had improved lives, reduced poverty, or affected local cultures. The catalogue of inappropriate projects was long and sometimes bizarre. Electrical equipment arrived in villages where no electricity was available, recycled clothing was sent to areas where it hurt local weavers, and grain shipments were sent to countries where they adversely affected local growers. Historically, foreign aid had gone to central governments, but it was now apparent that local governments and communities would have to play a larger role than in the past. Human development indexes were to be prepared, focusing not on per capita income alone but on literacy, life expectancy, health, nutrition, and the status of women and children. Donor governments meanwhile agreed to cancel the debt of many of the world’s poorest countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America and to help Third World countries gain freer access to the markets of the industrial world.

The IMF came under heavy criticism'. It had intervened in many currency crises over the years, generally pressuring governments to reduce spending and imposing overly rigid austerity measures that ignored the nation’s social needs. Exceeding its original mission, it had reoriented development policies in directions it considered economically desirable but with little recognition of the social or political consequences. Agreement emerged that the IMF should restrict itself to resolving currency and other short-time financial crises, no small task in itself, and leave development policies to the World Bank.

Another large and contentious issue was the impact of the global economic integration. Its most extreme critics argued that global trading systems and financial markets increased poverty, sharpened social divisions.

hurt the environment, exploited local working people, used child labor shamelessly, and shifted control over people’s lives to multinational corporations and the pursuit of profit. Although economic evidence did suggest that globalization had accomplished far less to relieve poverty and inequality than originally predicted, others maintained that free trade and information technology stimulated economic growth and would help the poor to improve their lives in the coming decades of the twenty-first century.

The vigorous debates on development policies may have shaped new priorities for future governmental and international development aid. A related debate explored the extent to which the developing countries might be left behind by the new information technology. The world of computers and the Internet, like other technological innovations, further widened the economic gap between rich and poor nations and raised new questions about how best to reduce the growing digital divide. All such debates about the development experience reflected the linkage between the historical legacy of the former colonial empires, the rapid process of decolonization, the expansion of the global economy, and the emergence in the second half of the twentieth century of the largest number of independent nation-states that the world had ever seen.