Chapter 20

DEMOCRACY AND DICTATORSHIP IN THE 1930S

100. The United States: Depression and New Deal

101. Trials and Adjustments of Democracy in Britain and France

102. Italian Fascism

103. Totalitarianism: Germany's Third Reich

In the 1920S, people in a general way believed that despite the horrors of the World War the twentieth century was realizing the material and political goals summed up in the idea of progress. In the 1930s, they began to fear that “progress” was a phantom, to speak the word self-consciously with mental quotation marks, and to be content if only they could prevent a relapse into positive barbarism and a new world war.

The Great Depression ushered in the nightmare of the 1930s. Everywhere the demand was for security. Each nation tried to live, so far as possible, within itself. Each regulated, controlled, guided, planned, and tried to rescue its own economic system, attempting to be as little influenced as possible by the unpredictable behavior of other countries. Within each country the same search for security encouraged the advancement of the welfare state and social democracy.

Where democratic institutions were strong and resilient, governments took steps to protect individuals against the ravages of unemployment and destitution and to help guard against future catastrophes. On the other hand, where democratic governments were not well established or taken for granted, which was the case in many countries after the First World War, dictatorship spread alarmingly in the 1930s with the coming of the depression. Democracy was said to be suited only to wealthy or prosperous countries. Unemployed people generally cared far more for economic help or for promises of economic help than for any theory of how persons wielding public power should be selected. The cry was for a leader, someone who would act, make decisions, get results, inspire confidence, and restore national pride. The Great Depression opened the way for unscrupulous and ambitious political adventurers, for dictators like Adolf Hitler in Germany, whose solution to all political and international problems, it turned out, was war.

100. THE UNITED STATES: DEPRESSION AND NEW DEAL

Profound changes took place in the United States, where the stock market crash of 1929 had precipitated the great economic collapse. In 1932 national income had dropped to less than half of what it had been in 1929; 12 million to 14 million were unemployed. The Republican President Herbert Hoover, elected in 1928 at the floodtide of prosperity, was identified in the public mind with the hard times. Hoover viewed with disfavor any large-scale government intervention, convinced that the business cycle that had brought the depression would in turn bring prosperity and that once business confidence was restored, recovery would begin. His administration did act, proposing for the world economy a one-year suspension of payments on all intergovernmental debts and at home giving financial assistance to banks and railroads, expanding credit facilities, and helping to save the mortgages of some farmers and small home owners.

But Hoover would go no further; he opposed immediate direct federal relief to the jobless; veterans seeking payment of their wartime bonuses to tide them over the bad times were forcibly ejected from Washington; unemployment, business failures, and farm foreclosures continued. In the election of 1932 the millions of unemployed workers, disheartened urban lower middle classes, and distressed farmers swept the Republican administration from office and elected the first Democratic president since Woodrow Wilson. The new president was Franklin Delano Roosevelt. The combination of recovery, relief, and reform legislation that he introduced is known as the New Deal.

The new president embarked rapidly on a program of improvisation and experimentation, but with such dispatch and vigor as to generate at once an electric enthusiasm. Within a short time an impressive array of legislation was put through Congress. The modest program of assistance to farmers, small home owners, and industry initiated under the Hoover administration was expanded so widely that it was no longer recognizable.

The government provided financial assistance for the relief of the unemployed and sponsored a broad public works program to absorb the jobless, first by loans to the states for the construction of housing, roads, bridges, and schools; later by a direct federal works program. To meet the financial crisis, the banks were temporarily closed and then reopened under stricter supervision. The dollar was taken off the gold standard and devalued, principally to help the farmers compete in foreign markets. In agriculture, the government offered subsidies to farmers who agreed to curtail farm production, even to the point of subsidizing the destruction of crops and livestock, so that ruinous surpluses which had been one cause of the agricultural distress might be eliminated. It was a paradox, to be sure, for the government to reduce acreage and destroy farm products while city populations were in want. But the administration sought to confront the deep-seated agricultural crisis that antedated the depression as well as to cope with the immediate situation. Subsequently, farmers received subsidies mostly for devoting part of their land to soil-conserving crops. A Civilian Conservation Corps promoted conservation and reforestation and helped relieve unemployment by giving jobs to almost 3 million young people. For industry a National Recovery Administration (the NRA) encouraged business firms to set up voluntary “codes of fair competition,” which helped to regulate prices and production.

All these measures were designed to set the ailing capitalist system on its feet again by creating purchasing power and stimulating industrial activity. The major innovation was government spending, or “deficit financing.” Although never following any consistent economic philosophy, the New Deal policies indirectly reflected the theories of the British economist John Maynard Keynes. In his earlier writings and in his most famous book The General Theory of Employment,

Interest, and Money published in 1936, he argued that if private investment funds were idle, government funds must be employed to encourage economic activity and to increase purchasing power until such time as private funds flowed again. In order to get money into circulation and to “prime the pump” of industrial production, the New Deal government undertook a huge borrowing and spending program. Unorthodox as deficit financing was, it seemed to many at the time (and to many since) the only direct and rapid method of preventing economic collapse in a capitalist system. In all these recovery and reform activities the federal government assumed a role that it had hitherto played only in wartime. New government agencies proliferated, the federal payroll grew, and the government debt more than doubled between 1932 and 1940.

From the beginning some longer-range reform measures were adopted in addition to the recovery measures. To prevent overspeculation and the recurrence of a stock market crash such as that of 1929, a Securities and Exchange Commission was created to regulate the issuance of stock and to supervise the operations of the stock exchange. Bank deposits were guaranteed by federal insurance so that depositors would not lose their lifetime savings. A Tennessee Valley Authority served as a pilot program in flood control, regional economic development, and cheap public power production, bringing electricity to farms and rural households.

After 1935 the focus shifted to regulation and reform. Sound economic recovery had not been achieved; there were still at least 5 million persons who could not find jobs in private industry. Business leaders who at first had been responsive to the government’s new role in the economy now resisted the government’s regulation of finance and industry. The Supreme Court declared the NRA and other New Deal measures unconstitutional.

The major New Deal reforms after 1935 were designed to improve the condition of labor and to cope with various kinds of economic insecurity. A broad national Social Security Act in 1935 provided for unemployment, old-age, and disability insurance. Here the United States was a latecomer. Germany, Britain, and other European countries had already enacted such legislation before the First World War. A Fair Labor Standards Act established 40 hours as a maximum normal workweek and set a minimum hourly wage; child labor was ended. A third measure, die National Labor Relations (or Wagner) Act, virtually transformed the American industrial scene. The act guaranteed the right of workers to set up and bargain through unions of their choice, outlawed company unions, and prohibited employers from interfering with union organizing or discriminating against union members. Under its aegis the older American Federation of Labor (AFL) was revitalized and a new vigorous Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) came into being, which now organized workers on an industrywide basis and reached down to unskilled workers in such industries as automobile, steel, textile, maritime, and rubber. Millions never before organized became part of powerful labor unions with expanding treasuries. Total union membership rose from about 4 million in 1929 to 9 million by 1940. Militant and conscious of its new strength but hardly touched by revolutionary ideology, American labor chose not to create a third party but to operate within the traditional two-party system, generally supporting Roosevelt’s Democratic party.

Government spending and renewed confidence in the soundness of the country’s institutions created a slow and partial recovery. By 1939 national income had risen to double what it had been at the depth of the depression but still short of June 1929. Resistance from the business community itself may have played a part in the failure to achieve full recovery. The rising public debt, antibusiness pronouncements by the government, heavier corporate and income taxes, and the concessions to labor undoubtedly frightened off business investments and led to what was called a “sit-down strike” of capital. Some claimed that wage rates had risen too sharply, adding to production costs and therefore discouraging business expansion. The New Deal did much to help economic recovery, but it did not end the depression. Complete recovery, the elimination of unemployment, and the full use (and expansion) of the nation’s productive capacity had to wait upon the huge war expenditures to come. By 1938 or so the New Deal was virtually over; the administration turned its attention from domestic reform to the gathering storm in Europe and the Far East.

The changes were substantial under what some called the “Roosevelt Revolution.” Enlarging the role of the federal government as no previous administration had done, the New Deal helped transform the noninterventionist state into a social service or welfare state. The government imposed controls on business, increased labor’s power and influence and its share of the national income, and introduced a broad social security system. It established the responsibility of public authority for the social and economic welfare of the people. When the Republican party later returned to power, it opposed in principle the further growth of the welfare state and the expanding role of the federal government, but it retained many of the New Deal reforms, a tacit admission that the New Deal had not intended to destroy capitalism but to preserve and revive it.

The New Deal, however, engendered violent feelings, which lingered on. Roosevelt, himself of patrician and well-to-do background, denounced the “economic royalists”; in turn he was called a “traitor to his class.” When the Supreme Court declared some New Deal measures unconstitutional, he made plans to reorganize (or “pack”) the Court, which aroused more political hostility. Despite vociferous opposition, in the election of 1936 Roosevelt won all but two states, and he was subsequently reelected in 1940 and 1944 (during the war, to be sure), for unprecedented third and fourth terms. A constitutional amendment in 1951 limited presidents to two terms.

Roosevelt’s opponents, at the time and later, argued that the New Deal had created an enormous regulatory bureaucracy, which was expensive, cumbersome, and a threat to the freedom and self-reliance of the citizenry. Others contended that despite its unorthodox financial policies, enlargement of the executive power, and expansion of the bureaucracy, it represented a bold and humanitarian way of meeting the economic crisis, and that it also preserved and reaffirmed American faith in its democratic system at a time when democracy was succumbing or was threatened elsewhere.

101. TRIALS AND ADJUSTMENTS OF DEMOCRACY IN BRITAIN AND FRANCE

British Politics: The 1920s and the Depression

Britain, like the United States, even in the troubles of the depression, remained firmly attached to representative institutions and democratic principles. The Great Depression aggravated and intensified Britain’s older economic difficulties. More dependent on overseas markets than any other people, the British until 1914 had managed to hold their lead, exporting industrial products and investment capital, selling insurance and other services, and importing foodstuffs. But in the years before 1914 the British were increasingly losing markets because of the emergence of other economically aggressive industrial nations, the growth of tariff barriers, the development of indigenous textile and other industries in India and elsewhere in the East, the competition of new textile products with British cottons and woolens, and the substitution of new sources of fuel for British coal. The losses were accelerated by the economic disruption of the First World War, the disappearance of many overseas investments, and the postwar disorganization and impoverishment of markets. The widespread rise in tariffs after the war and the customs barriers in the new small states of Europe also hurt British exports. After 1918 Britain lived in a world no longer dependent on, or eager for, its manufactures. Britain’s very historical primacy as the pioneer industrial country was also a handicap. Both labor and management had become adjusted to older conditions, and the more recently industrialized countries had newer techniques and machinery.

The net result of all this was that in the interwar years, even in times of relative prosperity for the rest of the world, Britain was in depression and suffered severely from unemployment. The unemployment insurance adopted in 1911 was called heavily into play. By 1921 over 2 million unemployed were receiving benefit payments, contemptuously called the “dole” by those who disliked it. Unemployment insurance, an expanded old-age pension system, medical aid, government-subsidized housing, and other social welfare measures helped to relieve economic distress and to prevent any drastic decline in the living standards of British workers. The welfare state was well established in Britain before the Labour party took office after the Second World War.

The labor unions made a strenuous effort to retain wage gains and other concessions won in wartime. Industry, hard-pressed itself, resisted. This situation reached a climax in 1926 in the coal-mining industry, which was in a particularly bad plight; government subsidies had not helped and even conservative investigators had recommended some form of amalgamation and public management. A strike by the coal miners led to a “general strike” supported by the other British unions; about half of the 6 million organized workers in Britain left their jobs as a token of sympathy and solidarity. But the government declared a state of emergency and made use of army and navy personnel and middle-class volunteers to take over essential services. The strike ended in failure, and even in a setback for the trade unions. They were put under stricter control by the Trades Disputes Act of 1927, which declared all general or sympathy strikes illegal and even forbade the unions from raising money for political purposes.

After the election of 1922, the Labour party displaced the Liberal party as the second of the two great parties of the country and faced the Conservatives as the official opposition. The Labour party, which had been no more than a loose federation of trade union and socialist organizations before the war, tightened its organizational structure, promoted labor legislation, and, bridging the gap between the trade unionists and the socialists, committed itself to a program of socialism. But it was a program of gradualist, democratic socialism operating through customary British parliamentary procedures and hence able to gain the goodwill of large sections of the middle classes.

Twice, in 1924 and in 1929, Labour governed the country with Ramsay MacDonald as prime minister, in each case as a coalition government. In 1924 Labour demonstrated its moderation. It did no more than extend unemployment relief and inaugurate housing and public works projects; indeed it acted firmly in the face of strikes that broke out. But it aroused opposition when it gave diplomatic recognition to the Soviet Union and pledged a loan to the Soviets for the purchase of British goods. Meanwhile newspapers published the so-called Red (or Zinoviev) letter purporting to be secret instructions from the head of the Communist International for British Labour groups to prepare for a Communist uprising in Britain. The document’s authenticity has never been established, but the Conservatives successfully exploited it and won the election of 1924.

In the election of May 1929, however, Labour’s representation almost doubled, and the Conservative representation dropped proportionately. MacDonald again became prime minister. The Wall Street crash and the worldwide depression came while the Labour party government was in office. The effects of the depression were quickly felt. Unemployment, which had hovered about the 1 million mark in 1929, soon approached the 3 million figure. The government expended large sums to supplement the unemployment insurance payments, and the public debt began to grow. Alarmed by the mounting deficit, MacDonald made plans to introduce a severe retrenchment policy, even to the extent of reducing the “dole” payments. The Labour party was outraged; some of the Labour ministers in his cabinet refused to support him. He was read out of the party, along with those ministers who had gone along with him.

MacDonald thereupon formed an all-party coalition cabinet known as the National government, which in an election of 1931 won an overwhelming victory, but it was the Conservative members of the coalition who took a majority of the seats in Parliament.

The National government coped with the depression chiefly along retrenchment lines, under Ramsay MacDonald from 1931 to 1935, Stanley Baldwin to 1937, and Neville Chamberlain after 1937. In addition to retrenchment and budget balancing, the government encouraged industry to reorganize and rationalize production by providing low-interest loans. Mainly, the government concentrated on economic nationalist measures rather than on fundamental changes in the capitalist economic system. As in the United States, despite some recovery from the depths of the depression, none of the steps taken brought full recovery or full employment. Unemployment persisted until military conscription and an expanded armament program absorbed the jobless.

Britain and the Commonwealth: Imperial Relations

To the older British Empire—India, the crown colonies, protectorates, and spheres of influence—the postwar settlement added a number of League of Nations mandates. British rule in its various forms extended to almost 500 million people, a fourth of the earth’s population and land surface. It was principally in Palestine, Egypt, India, and Ireland that the British faced complex imperial problems after the First World War. In Palestine, where Britain exercised a League of Nations mandate following the breakup of the Ottoman Empire, a bitter conflict developed as Jewish emigrants moved into the territory after 1919 (at which time there had been a relatively small population of about 570,000 Muslims, 75,000 Christians, and 60,000 Jews). The emigration increased rapidly during the 1930s, when Jews were escaping from Nazism and the rising anti-Semitism in Europe. Arabs and Jews began to struggle with each other and with Britain for control of lands that both groups claimed on the basis of long ancestries and ancient religions, inflamed now by modern nationalisms. In Egypt in 1922, Britain, although retaining the right to station some troops there, formally ended the protectorate it had established 40 years earlier; but many questions, especially the status of the Sudan, remained unresolved. In India the agitation for national independence, as we have seen, grew more intense. In all of these areas, from the Middle East to South Asia, nothing resembling a solution was arrived at until after the Second World War. In Ireland the independence movement managed to establish a separate republic.

The Irish question had disoriented English politics for 40 years. Home rule, authorized by Parliament in 1914, had been deferred for the duration of the war. During the hostilities the Irish nationalists even accepted German support and rose in rebellion against the British in 1916. The rebellion was suppressed, but after the war the Irish nationalists, led by the Sinn Fein party, fought a small but savage war of independence against the British. In 1922 the British finally recognized the Irish Free State, granting it dominion status within the British Commonwealth. But the Protestants in Ulster, the northern counties of Ireland where Presbyterians of Scottish origin had lived for three centuries and where they comprised a majority of the population, insisted on remaining outside the new state. Despite the vehement dissatisfaction of Irish nationalists, Ulster continued to be part of what was now called the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. In 1937 the Irish Free State affirmed its full sovereignty and took the name Eire. In 1949 it broke all ties with the British Commonwealth and renamed itself the Republic of Ireland. The Irish question, however, remained unsettled throughout the rest of the century and beyond because the Irish agitated for the annexation of Ulster. The conflict pitted Irish moderates against Irish extremists, the latter perpetrating assassinations, bombings, and other disturbances to further their cause of uniting all Ireland with the Irish Republic. The Protestants in Ulster meanwhile remained obdurate about retaining their own religious and cultural identity and maintaining their political affiliation with Britain.

As for the dominions, the political status of these areas of European settlement overseas was now more clearly defined than ever before. The dominions—Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa—had long pursued their own independent policies, even levying tariffs against British goods. They had all joined loyally with Great Britain in the First World War, but all were stirred by a nationalism of their own and desired their independence to be regularized and promulgated to the world. An imperial conference in 1926 defined “dominion status,” which was then corroborated by the Statute of Westminster of 1931. The dominions became legally equal with each other and with Great Britain. No act passed by the British Parliament would apply to a dominion except by the dominion’s own consent. Despite independent policies in economic matters and even in foreign affairs, the bonds between the dominions and Britain remained firm; the support of the dominions in the Second World War was to be vital in Britain’s survival. In the postwar world, with decolonization, the Commonwealth became a larger, more heterogeneous, and even more flexible institution.

France: The 1920s and the Coming of the Depression

When the depression came to France, right-wing agitation of fascist type made more headway than in Britain or the United States. Earlier, in the 1920s, France was preoccupied with recovery from the physical destruction of the war, the instability of public finances, and the fear of a resurgent Germany. Immediately after 1919, and for most of the 1920s, the government was run by coalitions of parties of the conservative Right, that is, parties supported by business and financial interests, well disposed toward the army and church, and determined to maintain stability in domestic affairs. For a brief time, from 1924 to 1926, the Radical Socialists were in control; this party of the moderate left, whose leader was Edouard Herriot, served as spokesman for the lower classes, small business, and farmers; it advocated progressive social legislation but only so long as increased taxes were not necessary. Despite its name, a carryover from an earlier era, it was firmly committed to private enterprise and private property (and was often described as “neither radical nor socialist”); it was staunch in its defense of individual liberties and fervently anticlerical; sometimes, it seemed, its anticlericalism was a substitute for any more positive program.

Although the Radical Socialists cooperated in parliamentary elections with the Socialists, the other major party of the Left, the two parties differed too profoundly on economic policies to preserve stable coalitions. In the 1920s the Socialists were still recovering from the secession of the more orthodox Marxists who had formed a French Communist party. Both Left and Right in France shaded off into antidemocratic groups that were hostile to the parliamentary republic. These included the Communists on the Left, who sat in Parliament and took part in elections; and on the extreme Right, royalists of the Action Française and other antirepublican organizations, which operated principally outside the Chamber as militant and noisy pressure groups.

The outstanding figure of the moderate conservative right was Raymond Poincaré, who sent troops into the Ruhr in 1923 when the Germans failed to pay reparations, and who also “saved” the franc. The reparations question was extremely important for French finances. The country had undertaken a large-scale reconstruction program to repair the wartime devastation of northern and eastern France and had counted upon the defeated enemy to pay. When German reparations were not paid as anticipated, the public debt mounted, a balanced budget became impossible, and the franc declined precipitously. The huge war expenditures, heavy loss of foreign investments, notably in Russia, and an outmoded taxation program which invited widespread evasion added to French difficulties. After 1926, when the financial crisis reached a climax, a “national union” ministry under Poincaré inaugurated new taxes, tightened tax collection, cut down drastically on government expenditures to balance the budget, and eventually stabilized the franc—at about one-fifth its prewar value. The internal debt was thus in effect largely repudiated, to the despair of many bondholders, but the threat of a runaway inflation like that of the Weimar Republic was avoided. From 1926 to 1929 the country prospered. New factories, replacing those destroyed in the war, were modern and up to date. The index of industrial production rose; tourists flocked in. As in many other countries, however, workers did not share proportionately in the prosperity of the 1920s, and labor unions still had little influence on the French government’s social policies.

The Great Depression came later to France and was less severe than in the United States or Germany. Trade declined. Unemployment increased; in 1935, close to 1 million workers were unemployed, and half of those employed worked part-time. Industrial production, which in 1930 was 40 percent above the prewar level, sank by 1932 to 1913 figures. The government displayed its older pattern of unstable, short-lived ministries; in 1933 five ministries rapidly succeeded one another (there were some 40 in the 20 interwar years). The depression cabinets followed a policy of retrenchment and economy, clung to the gold standard, and faced the threat of an aggressive new government in Germany, where Adolf Hitler had become chancellor in 1933.

Depression Ferment and the Popular Front

In the uneasy years of the depression, the latent right-wing hostility to the republic came to the surface. Fascist-type “leagues” appeared in open imitation of Italian and German fascist organizations, many obtaining funds from wealthy industrialists; the older Action Frangaise and right-wing veterans’ associations like Colonel de le Rocque’s Croix de Feu continued to be active. The same elements that had been antirepublican, antidemocratic, or monarchist since the French Revolution, and which in the nineteenth century had rallied behind Boulanger and denounced Dreyfus, now grew more strident in their attacks on the parliamentary republic.

In 1934 it seemed for a moment that the opportunity awaited by the antirepublican elements had come. A political and financial scandal shook the country. A financial manipulator and adventurer with important political connections, Serge Alexandre Stavisky, induced the municipal authorities at Bayonne to launch a flotation of worthless bonds. Faced with exposure, he fled and apparently committed suicide; the sensationalist press and right-wing political agitators encouraged the rumor that Stavisky had been shot by the police to prevent the implication of high-ranking politicians. A clamor went up accusing the government of involvement in the financial scandal. Where elsewhere such an affair would have called only for turning the incumbents out of office, in France it supplied ammunition for those who demanded the end of the republic itself, which they now equated with corruption and venality.

The agitation reached a climax in the riots of February 1934. A crowd of angry anti-republican activists and other right-wing extremists assembled in Paris at the Place de la Concorde, where they threatened the nearby Chamber of Deputies and battled violently with the police; several were killed and hundreds were injured. French liberals and democrats, organized labor, and socialists were outraged by the threat to the republic from violent agitators who resembled the fascist groups that had seized power elsewhere in Europe. The Communists, hostile to the fascist groups, were unfriendly to the government too, but soon, guided by the Comintern, they sensed the danger to the Soviet Union in the event of a French fascist triumph and joined with the antifascists. As elsewhere, in the 1930s the Communists emerged from their sectarian revolutionary isolation, adopted patriotic programs, and widened their prestige, influence, and appeal. An impressive labor-sponsored general strike was held a week after the riots. Shortly thereafter, Radical Socialists, Socialists, and Communists drew together in a political coalition that came to be known as the Popular Front, of the kind that was being organized, or advocated, in many countries in the 1930s. It campaigned on a pledge to defend the republic against fascism, to take measures against the depression, and to introduce labor reforms. In the spring of 1936 it won a decisive victory at the polls. The French Socialists for the first time in their history became the leading party in the Chamber; their chief, L6on Blum, long a spokesman for democratic and reformist socialism, became premier of a coalition cabinet of Socialists and Radical Socialists; the Communists, who had increased their representation in the Chamber from 10 to 72 seats, did not join the cabinet but pledged their support.

The Popular Front and After

Blum’s Popular Front ministry, although it lasted little more than a year, put through a program of far-reaching legislation. In part, this was due to the Popular Front election program, in part to unforeseen events, for the tremendous enthusiasm generated by the victory led to a spontaneous nationwide wave of “sit-down strikes,” in which the striking workers refused to leave their factories or shops until Blum pledged a number of immediate reforms.

Parliament in short order passed laws providing for a 40-hour week, vacations with pay, and a collective bargaining law. As in the case of the Wagner Act in the United States, the encouragement given to collective bargaining led to the nationwide signing of collective contracts for the first time in the country’s history and to enormous growth in trade union membership, from about 1 million to 5 million in a year’s time. Other legislation was important too. Steps were taken to nationalize the armaments and aviation industry; the fascist armed leagues were, at least in theory, dissolved; the Bank of France was reorganized and placed under government control to break the power of the nation’s close-knit economic elite, the so-called “two hundred families.” Machinery was established for the arbitration of labor disputes. Aid was given to farmers through price fixing and government purchases of wheat. As in the United States all these measures aimed at both recovery and reform; Blum spoke openly of his program as a “French New Deal.” But French conservatives, and the quasi-fascists to their Right, cried revolution; they uttered dark predictions that a French Lenin would follow Blum. They did not conceal their sullen resentment at what had come to pass: the fate of Catholic France in the hands of a leftist, a Socialist, and a Jew. Even salvation by a warrior from outside the country, one who had demonstrated his anti-Bolshevism, would be preferable. They envied the protection given to established interests by Mussolini, and there were those who, it was said, even muttered “better Hitler than Léon Blum.”

The Popular Front reforms, long overdue though they were, came to France at a time when the sands were rapidly running out. While France had a 40-hour week, German arms plants were operating at full capacity. In the shadow of Nazi remilitarization a rearmament program had to be undertaken at the very same time as reform; even moderates argued that the country could not afford both. Opposition from many quarters hindered success. French employers balked at cooperating in the new labor reforms and tried to pass on rising production costs to the consumer. Labor was disgruntled at the price rises that canceled out its wage gains. Both employers and labor applied the 40-hour week in such a manner that plants were shut down for two days a week instead of operating in shifts, as the law had made possible. Nothing could check the flight of gold from the country. Industrial production hardly rose; even in 1938, when it had shown substantial recovery in other countries, it was only 5 percent higher in France than at the depth of the depression.

In July 1936 the Spanish Civil War had broken out. The Communists attacked the Blum government for refusing aid to the hard-pressed Spanish Popular Front government, which was fighting fascist forces across the Pyrenees; Blum, following the lead of Britain and fearful also of involving a divided France, resisted. In 1937, after a year in office, the Blum government was overthrown by the Senate, which refused to grant it emergency financial powers. The Popular Front coalition rapidly disintegrated. By mid-1938 the Radical Socialists had abandoned their allies on the Left and under Edouard Daladier formed a conservative ministry, whose attention was increasingly occupied by the international crisis. Little remained of the Popular Front, or indeed of the strength of labor, which declined rapidly and exhausted itself further by an unsuccessful general strike in 1938 in protest against nullification of the 40-hour week. Although the conservative government did not overturn all of the recent social reforms, French workers found that 1936 had gone the way of other “great years” in French history; the comfortable classes had been thrown into panic by the social turmoil; internal division and class hatreds had grown sharper. Yet the French democracy, the Third Republic itself, had been successfully preserved and its domestic enemies repulsed, at least for a time.

Western Europe and the Depression

Britain and France, and indeed all western Europe, Europe’s inner zone, never fully recovered from the Great Depression before the Second World War. When economic expansion resumed after the war, the interwar years seemed like a deep trough in Europe’s economic history. Western Europe barely maintained its old industrial equipment in the depression and was unable to utilize even its existing machinery to capacity. Moreover, as the events of 1929 had clearly shown, Europe’s economic dependence on the United States was pronounced, and the U.S.S.R. was becoming an industrial giant. The economic destiny of Europeans in the 1930s was very much in doubt.

There were other signs of decline. The birth rate in western Europe in the 1930s fell to its lowest recorded levels as people postponed marriage or limited the size of their families because of economic and psychological stresses. Birth rates did not run significantly higher than death rates; the population was stagnating and growing older. There was a scarcity of middle-age men because of the casualties of the First World War. Politically neither British nor French democratic political leaders were able to cope with the economic dilemmas of the depression era. Nor could the Socialists, who found little practical guidance in the ideas of Marxian economics or class struggle, but failed to renew or reinvigorate their own doctrines in any significant way.

102. ITALIAN FASCISM

Though they shade into each other imperceptibly, it is possible to distinguish dictatorship from totalitarianism. Dictatorship, an old phenomenon in history, has commonly been regarded as a mere expedient, designed for emergencies and believed to be temporary; at most, it is a theory of government to justify the authoritarian exercise of state power. Totalitarianism, as it arose after the First World War, was not merely a theory of government but a theory of life and of human nature. It claimed to be no expedient but a permanent form of society and civilization, and so far as it appealed to emergency for justification, it regarded life itself as an everlasting emergency. This new kind of totalitarianism, when it emerged in Western Europe, came from the political Right and carried significant theoretical differences from Russian Communism—which it vehemently rejected and yet in its repressive methods, its cult of the leader, and its one-party rule it often resembled. The first of the new right-wing totalitarian movements to seize power in Europe appeared somewhat unexpectedly in Italy in the form of fascism.

Mussolini and the Fascist Seizure of Power

The belief widely held in the 1920s that democracy was generally advancing was not deeply disturbed by the failure of Russia or Turkey or China to develop effective parliaments or liberal institutions. These were regarded as “backward” countries, in the throes of revolution; someday, when conditions quieted down, it could be supposed, they would move forward to democracy as known in the West. Italy thus became a jarring exception to the apparent victory of democracy in western societies because the Italians had always been an integral part of Europe and European history. Although Italy had accepted parliamentary liberalism and other democratic institutions since 1861, Benito Mussolini seized control of the Italian government in 1921 and proclaimed the new ruling ideology and political system of Fascismo.

Mussolini, born in 1883, the son of a blacksmith, was a fiery and pugnacious character, who before the war had followed the career of professional revolutionary, left-wing socialist, and radical journalist. He had read and digested Marxist writings but also works such as Sorel’s Reflections on Violence and the writings of Nietzsche. During the war he turned intensely nationalist, clamored for Italian intervention on the side of the Allies, and demanded the conquest from Austria of Italia irredenta, the “unredeemed” Italian lands to the north and across the Adriatic. In the war he served as a corporal. In March 1919 he organized, mainly from demobilized and restless ex-soldiers, his first fighting band, or fascio di combattimento. Fascio meant a bunch or bundle, as of sticks; it called to mind the Latin fasces, or bundle of rods, carried by the lictors in ancient Rome as a symbol of state power—for Mussolini loved to conjure up ancient glories.

In 1919 Italian glories were dim. Italy had entered the war on the side of the Allies quite frankly for territorial and colonial spoils; the secret treaty of London in 1915 had promised the Italians certain Austrian lands and a share in German and Turkish possessions. During the war Italian arms did not especially shine; Italian troops were routed at Caporetto in 1917. Yet Italy lost over 600,000 lives in the war, and the Italian delegates came to the peace conference confident that their sacrifices would be recognized and their territorial aspirations would be satisfied. They were rapidly disappointed. Wilson refused to honor the provisions of the London secret treaty and other demands of the Italians. Britain and France displayed no eagerness to side with Italy. The Italians received some of the Austrian territories promised to them, but to their resentment they were given no part of the former German or Turkish possessions as mandates.

After the war Italy, like other countries, suffered from the burden of wartime debt and from acute postwar depression and unemployment.

Social unrest spread. In the countryside land seizures took place, not in any significant proportions but enough to spread concern among landowners; tenant farmers refused to pay rents; peasants burned crops and destroyed livestock. In the cities great strikes broke out in heavy industry and in transportation. Some of the strikes turned into sit-down strikes, the workers refusing to leave the plants; demands were raised even for worker control of the factories. Moderate socialist and labor leaders disavowed all such extremism, but left-wing socialists who, as elsewhere, had turned Communist and joined the Third International, fanned the existing discontents. Meanwhile, armed bands of young men, most prominent of whom were the Blackshirts or Fascists, brawled with Communists and ordinary workers in the streets. By the late summer of 1920 the strikes and the agrarian unrest had subsided, although violence in the streets persisted.

During the months of turmoil the government refrained from any bold action, and the already low respect for Italy’s parliamentary system sank even lower. In 1919 the first postwar election gave impressive victories to the Socialists and a new Catholic Popular party (the latter were also called Christian Socialists). In 1921, in the wake of the postwar disturbances, new elections were held. Despite concerns about the recent social turmoil, liberals and democrats, moderate socialists, and the Catholic Popular Party were all returned in large numbers. Mussolini’s Fascist movement won only 35 of the 500-odd seats. This less than impressive showing was the best the Fascists ever achieved in a free election, but the Fascist ranks were nonetheless swelling outside the regular channels of electoral politics —in the backwash, as it were, of the postwar unrest.

Mussolini and the Fascists at first went along with the radical tide; they did not disapprove the factory seizures; they inveighed against plutocracy and war profiteers and called for a high levy on capital and profits. But Mussolini, never one to sacrifice opportunity for principles or doctrine, soon came forward with his Fascists as the upholders of national law and order, and hence property; he now pledged battle “against the forces dissolving victory and nation.” Although the social agitation subsided, burning itself out on its own, and there had never been any real threat of a Soviet-style revolution, the propertied classes had gone through a great fright; they found comfort in the Fascist movement and were willing to lend it financial support. Patriots and nationalists of all classes rallied to it, as well as the lower middle class, which was pinched by economic inflation and, as elsewhere, was unable to find protection or solace in labor unions or socialist n\ovements. The black-shirted upholders of national order proceeded methodically to administer beatings (and doses of castor oil) to Communists and alleged Communists, to Socialists and Christian Socialists, and to ordinary persons who did not support them; nor did they refrain from arson and murder. Vigilante fascist squadrons, the squadristi, broke up strikes, demolished labor union headquarters, and drove from office duly elected Socialist and Communist mayors and town officials. Mussolini nevertheless reinforced his claim as paladin of law, authority, and order by declaring his loyalty to king and church; a few years earlier he had been a rabid republican and anticlerical.

In October 1922 the “March on Rome” took place. The Blackshirts mobilized for a threatened coup and began to converge from various directions on the capital; Mussolini remained at a safe distance in Milan. The liberal-democratic coalition cabinet had viewed the events of the past two years with disapproval but at the same time saw with satisfaction that the Blackshirts were serving a useful national purpose by suppressing troublemakers on the Left. Now they made belated but ineffectual gestures to save the situation by an effort to have martial law declared, but the king refused to approve. The cabinet resigned and Mussolini was named premier. It was all quite legal, or almost so. Indeed Italy was still in form a constitutional and parliamentary monarchy. Mussolini headed only a coalition ministry and received from parliament no more than a year’s grant of full emergency powers to restore order and introduce reforms.

But soon it was clear in whose hands power rested. Before the expiration of his emergency powers Mussolini forced through parliament a law providing that any party securing the largest number of votes in an election should automatically receive two-thirds of the seats in the legislature. The two-thirds law was not even necessary. In the 1924 elections, although seven opposition slates appeared, the Fascists, aided by control of the electoral machinery and the use of squadristi, received well over three-fifths of the total vote.

After the elections of 1924 the highly respected Socialist deputy Matteotti publicly exposed hundreds of cases of armed Fascist violence, fraud, and chicanery.

He was murdered by Fascists. There was widespread indignation in the country, and the press clamored for Mussolini’s resignation. The left and centrist parties, in an act that proved to be a serious miscalculation, seceded in protest from the Chamber, wanting to have nothing to do with such a government. Mussolini, not directly involved in the assassination, expressed a willingness to punish the perpetrators but eventually took full responsibility and moved to consolidate his dictatorship. Within a few years he reduced the Italian parliament to a nonentity, placed the press under censorship, abolished the labor unions, deprived labor of the right to strike, and abolished all political parties except the Fascist party.

The Fascist State

Fascism in the 1920s was an innovation which the rest of the world was slow to understand. In his more flamboyant moments Mussolini strutted, stuck out his jaw, and glared ferociously; he jumped through flaming hoops to show his virility and had his chief subordinates do likewise; to the outside world this seemed an odd way of demonstrating fitness for public office. He denounced democracy as historically outmoded and declared that it accentuated class struggle, split people into countless minority parties, and led to selfishness, futility, evasion, and empty talk. In place of democracy he preached the need of vigorous action under a strong leader; he himself took the title of Leader, or Duce. He denounced liberalism, free trade, laissez-faire, and capitalism, along with Marxism, materialism, socialism, and class consciousness, which he said were the evil offspring of liberal ideas and capitalist economies. In their place he preached national solidarity and state management of economic affairs under the same Leader’s farseeing and audacious vision. And in fact Mussolini seemed to bring a limited kind of new efficiency to Italian society; as the saying went, he made the trains run on time.

Mussolini introduced, at least in theory, the syndical, or corporative state, which had been discussed in both left- and right-wing circles for many years. Left-wing syndicalism, especially before the First World War, looked to revolutionary labor unions to expropriate the owners of industry and then to assume the direction of political and economic life. A more conservative syndicalism had been endorsed and encouraged by the Catholic church, with which Mussolini made his peace when he signed with the papacy the Lateran accord in 1929 recognizing the independence and sovereignty of Vatican City. The more conservative type of syndicalism looked nostalgically toward a revival of the medieval guilds, or “corporations,” in which master and journeymen, employer and employees, had labored side by side in a supposedly golden age of social peace.

The Fascist corporative system really resembled neither of the older syndicalist theories because in practice the hand of the state was writ large, something that neither of the older corporative doctrines had anticipated. The system went through a number of complicated stages, but as it finally emerged in the 1930s, it provided for the division of all economic life into 22 major areas, for each of which a “corporation” was established. In each corporation representatives of Fascist-organized labor groups, employers, and the government determined working conditions, wages, prices, and industrial policies; and in a national council these representatives were supposed jointly to devise plans for Italy’s economic self-sufficiency. In each case the role of government was decisive and the whole structure was under the jurisdiction of a minister of corporations. As a final step, these corporative economic chambers were integrated into the government proper so that in 1938 the old Chamber of Deputies was superseded by a Chamber of Fasces and Corporations representing the corporations and the Fascist party, all of its members selected by the government and not subject to popular ratification. The upper house, the Senate, continued to exist in its older form.

None of this was democratic, but this was an improvement over democracy, the Fascists asserted. A legislature in an advanced economic society, they said, should represent not political parties and geographical constituencies but economic occupations. Organization along such lines would do away with the anarchy and class conflict engendered by free capitalism, which only sap the strength of the national state. In the end real authority rested with the government—the head of the government, the Duce, who settled most matters by decree. In point of fact, social unrest and class conflict were “ended,” not by the corporative system as such, but by the prohibition of strikes and lockouts and the abolition of independent labor unions. The corporative system represented the most extreme form of state control over economic life within a framework of private enterprise and a capitalist economy, that is, one in which ownership continued to rest in private hands. It was the Fascist answer to Western-style democracy and to Soviet proletarian dictatorship. Fascism, said Mussolini, is the “dictatorship of the state over many classes cooperating.”

When the depression struck, none of Italy’s economic controls availed very much. Mussolini was eager to lay upon the world depression the blame for Italy’s continuing economic ills. He turned to a vigorous program of public works and to increasing economic self-sufficiency. A “battle of wheat” was launched to increase food production; progress was made in reclaiming swamp areas in central Italy and in developing hydroelectric power as a substitute for the coal that Italy lacked. Throughout the Fascist era no fundamental reform changed the status of the farmers and peasants. The existing structure of society, which in Italy meant social extremes of wealth and poverty, remained unaltered. Fascism provided neither the economic security nor the material well-being for which it had demanded the sacrifice of individual freedom and democracy. It undeniably, however, substituted a widespread psychological exhilaration, a feeling that Italy was undergoing a heroic national revival; and after 1935 to support that feeling Mussolini turned increasingly to military and imperialist adventures.

Fascism came to be regarded in other countries as a possible alternative to democratic or parliamentary government, as an actual corrective to troubles whose reality no one could deny. All Communists hated it, and so did all Socialists, labor leaders, moderate leftists, idealistic liberals, and many traditional conservatives. Wealthier or established people, because of fear of Bolshevism, made more allowances in its favor. In East European countries, often highly nationalistic, or influenced by disgruntled landowners, or simply unused to settling questions by majority vote, fascism made a considerable appeal. In the Latin countries, in Spain, Portugal, and France, Mussolini’s corporative state found champions and admirers. Sometimes, in Europe and elsewhere intellectuals spun sophisticated theories about the new order of discipline and authority, forgetting how Mussolini himself with unusual candor had written, “Fascism was not the nursling of a doctrine worked out beforehand with detailed elaboration; it was born of the need for action.”

103. TOTALITARIANISM: GERMANY'S THIRD REICH

The Rise of Adolf Hitler

It was in Germany that Mussolini found his aptest pupil. born in Austria in 1889, Adolf Hitler did little before the war. He was not an intellectual, like the prewar leftist journalist Mussolini. He was never a socialist, but he fell into a restless and racist type of radicalism. Son of an Austrian customs official, he lost his father at 14 and his mother a few years later. He dropped out of high school at 16 and at 19 came to the great metropolis of Vienna as an art student but was never accepted into the academy to which he sought admission. When the small inheritance left by his parents ran out and a government grant for orphan students ended, he drifted into various menial jobs, occasionally selling a few of his postcard and poster paintings but mainly eking out a marginal existence with hardly any friends, money, or livelihood.

The young Hitler did not like what he saw in Vienna: neither the trappings of the Habsburg court, nor the nobility of eastern Europe who rode by in their carriages, nor the mixed nationalities of the Danubian empire, nor the Vienna worker’s attachment to international Marxism, nor above all the Jews, who thanks to a century of liberal influences had become assimilated into the German culture and now occupied many distinguished positions in business, law, medicine, and journalism in the city. He became exceedingly race conscious and racist, not unlike others in many countries at the time. The youthful Hitler took a special satisfaction in thinking of himself as a pure German of the good old German stock. He became violently anti-Semitic, and he also disliked aristocracy, capitalism, socialism, cosmopolitanism, internationalism, and “hybridization.”

His aversion to Austria led him in 1913 to move to Munich, capital of the South German state of Bavaria. Once again he drifted without livelihood except by occasionally selling a few of his watercolors. When the war broke out, he volunteered for the German army. He served as a dispatch runner to the front line, and at one point was the victim of a gas attack that temporarily blinded him and injured his vocal cords. Although he rose in rank only to the rough equivalent of corporal, he received important military decorations. For Hitler, as for Mussolini and others, the war was a thrilling, noble, and liberating experience. The average individual in modern society led a pretty dull existence. Peace, for many, was a drab routine from which war was an exciting emancipation. Human atoms, floating in an impersonal and unfriendly world, they were stirred by the nationalism which the war aroused into a sense of belonging to, believing in, and fighting for something greater than themselves, but which was yet their own. When peace returned, they felt a letdown.

When the war ended, Hitler remained for a time on active duty and was transferred to Munich. Bavaria in 1919 was a principal focus of the Communist expansion in central Europe; a Bavarian Soviet Republic even existed for about three weeks until crushed by the federal government in Berlin. The Communist threat made Bavaria a busy center for anticommunist, antisocialist, antirepublican, and antidemocratic agitation of all kinds, and the seat of a disgruntled illiberalism. It swarmed with secret societies and paramilitary organizations led by discontented army officers or others who fitted with difficulty into the new Weimar democracy. Hitler, working with the army’s political instruction program, which had been created to combat socialist and democratic propaganda among the demobilized veterans and workers, joined at the army’s behest a tiny party called the German Workers’ party and soon became its leader. Early in 1920 he proclaimed its 25-point program, the party now calling itself the National Socialist German Workers’ party. Thus were born the Nazis, so called from the German way of pronouncing the first two syllables of “National.” Now demobilized, Hitler was fully launched on a career of radical politics.

We have earlier noted the beginnings of the Weimar Republic and the burdens it was compelled to bear from the start—the Versailles peace, reparations, the catastrophic inflation of 1923. Something has been said also of the failure of the republicans to inaugurate the kind of deeper social changes that might have democratized the political and social structure of German society and thereby strengthened republican forces. For five years after the war, violence remained sporadic in Germany. Communist agitation continued; but more dangerous, because they attracted more sympathy among the Germans, were the maneuvers of monarchist and antirepublican organizations, which maintained armed bands and staged uprisings like the unsuccessful Kapp Putsch of 1920. One such private “army” was the Brownshirts or Storm Troopers maintained by the Nazis. Such bands even resorted to assassination. Thus Walter Rathenau was murdered in 1922; he had organized German production during the war, and in 1922 he was foreign minister, but he had democratic and internationalist inclinations—and was a Jew. Another victim was Matthias Erzberger, a leading moderate politician of the Catholic Center party—he had helped “betray” the army by signing the armistice.

In 1923, when reparations payments were not forthcoming, the French army occupied the Ruhr. A clamor of national indignation swept over Germany. Hitler and the National Socialists, who since 1919 had obtained a considerable following, denounced the Weimar government for shameful submission to the French. They judged the moment opportune for seizing power; and at the end of 1923, in imitation of Mussolini’s march on Rome the year before, the Brownshirts staged the “beer hall Putsch” in Munich. Hitler jumped on the platform, fired a revolver at the ceiling, and shouted that the “national revolution has broken out.” But the police suppressed the disturbance, and Hitler was sentenced to five years in prison. He was released in less than a year; the Weimar democracy dealt mildly with its enemies.

In prison Hitler wrote his book, Mein Kampf (My Struggle), a turbid stream of personal recollection, racism, nationalism, collectivism, theories of history, Jew-baiting, and political comment. Mein Kampf sold widely.

The book and the publicity that had accompanied the five-week trial converted Hitler into a political figure of national prominence. The former soldier was not alone in his ideas; no less a person than General Ludendorff, who had distinguished himself in the war, and after the war became one of the most grotesquely unbalanced of the old officer class, gave his warm support to Hitler and even took part in the beer hall Putsch.

Beginning in 1924, with the French out of the Ruhr, reparations adjusted, a new and stable currency adopted, and loans from foreign countries, mainly the United States, Germany began to enjoy an amazing economic revival. National Socialism lost its appeal; the party lost members, Hitler was regarded as a charlatan, and his followers as a lunatic fringe. All seemed quiet. Then came the Great Depression in 1929. Adolf Hitler, who might have faded out of history, was transformed by the circumstances attending the depression in Germany into a figure of Napoleonic proportions.

No country suffered more than Germany from the worldwide economic collapse. Foreign loans abruptly ceased. Factories ground to a halt. There were 6 million unemployed. The middle class had not really recovered from the great inflation of 1923; struck again, after so brief a respite, they lost all faith in the economic system and in its future. The Communist vote steadily mounted; large numbers of the middling masses, who saw in communism their own death warrant, looked about desperately for someone to save them from Bolshevism. The depression also stirred up the universal German loathing for the Treaty of Versailles. Many Germans explained the ruin of Germany by the postwar treatment it had received from the Allies—the constriction of its frontiers; the loss of its colonies, markets, shipping, and foreign investments; the colossal demand for reparations; the occupation of the Ruhr; the inflation; and much else.

Any people in such a trap would have been bewildered and resentful. But many Germans responded to their crisis with ideas and actions that may have reflected or grown out of Germany’s political experience and position in Europe over the previous three or four centuries. Democracy—the agreement to obtain and accept majority verdicts, to discuss and compromise, to adjust conflicting interests without wholly satisfying or wholly crushing either side—was hard enough to maintain in any country in a crisis. In Germany democracy was itself an innovation, which had yet to prove its value, which could easily be called un-German, an artificial and imported doctrine, a foreign system foisted upon Germany by the victors in the late war.

Hitler inflamed all such feelings by his propaganda. He denounced the Treaty of Versailles as a national humiliation. He denounced the Weimar democracy for producing class struggle, division, weakness, and wordy futility. He called for “true” democracy in a vast and vital stirring of the people, or Volk, behind a Leader who was a man of action. He declared that Germans, pure Germans, must rely only on themselves. He inveighed against Marxists, Bolsheviks, communists, and socialists, throwing them all together in a deliberate beclouding of the issues; but he claimed to favor the right kind of socialism for the little man, that is, the doctrine of the National Socialist German Workers’ party. He ranted against unearned incomes, war profits, the power of the great trusts and chain stores, land speculators, interest slavery, and unfair taxes. Above all, he denounced the Jews, who, like individuals in other social and religious groups, could be found in all political camps. They now came under attack from anti-Semitic extremists on all sides of the political spectrum. To the Left, Jewish capitalists were anathema. To the Right, Jewish revolutionaries were a horror. In anti-Semitism Hitler found a lowest common denominator upon which to appeal to all parties and classes. At the same time the Jews were a small minority (only 600,000 in all Germany), so that in an age of mass politics it was safe enough to attack them.

In the election of 1930 the Nazis won 107 seats in the Reichstag; in 1928 they had won only 12; their popular vote went up from 800,000 to 6.5 million. The Communist representation rose from 54 to 77. By July 1932 the Nazis more than doubled their popular vote, won 230 seats, and were now by far the largest single party though because of the multiplicity of parties they fell well short of a majority. In another election, in November 1932, the Nazis, though still well out in front, showed some loss of strength, losing 2 million votes, and dropping to 196 seats. The Communist vote had risen progressively to a peak of 100 in November 1932.

After the relative setback of November 1932 Hitler feared that his movement was passing. But certain conservative, nationalist, and antirepublican elements—old aristocrats, Junker landowners, army officers, Rhineland steel magnates, and other industrialists—had conceived the idea that Hitler could be useful to them. From such sources, which supported other reactionary causes as well, came a portion of Nazi funds. This influential group, mainly from the small Nationalist party, was confident that it would be able to control Hitler and hence control the wave of national and mass discontent that he was leading.

After Bruening’s resignation in June 1932, Franz von Papen headed a Nationalist cabinet with the backing of the influential army leader General Kurt von Schleicher. In December 1932 Schleicher forced Papen’s downfall and succeeded him. When he too was compelled to resign a month later, both men, intriguing separately and against each other, prevailed upon President Hindenburg to name Hitler chancellor of a coalition cabinet. On January 30, 1933, by entirely legal means, Adolf Hitler became chancellor of the German Republic; other positions in the new cabinet were filled by the Nationalists, with whom the Nazis were to share power.

But to share power was not the Nazis’ aim. Hitler called for another election. A week before election day in March the Reichstag building caught fire. The Nazis, without any real evidence, blamed it on the Communists. They frightened the population with a Red scare, suspended freedom of speech and press, and set loose the Brownshirts to bully the voters. Even so, in the election, the Nazis won only 44 percent of the vote; with their Nationalist allies, they had 52 percent. Hitler, trumpeting a national emergency, was voted dictatorial powers by a pliant Reichstag from which the Communist deputies by now had been excluded. The Nazi revolution began.

The Nazi State

Hitler called his new order the Third Reich. He declared that following the First Reich, or Holy Roman Empire, and the Second Reich, the empire founded by Bismarck that had ended with the war in 1918, the Third Reich would carry on the process of true German history, of which, he said, it was the organic outgrowth and natural culmination. The Third Reich, he prophesied, would last a thousand years.

Like Mussolini, Hitler took the title of Leader, or, in German, the Führer. He claimed to represent the absolute sovereignty of the German people. Jews were considered un-German. Democracy, parliamentarianism, and liberalism were condemned and together with communism were labeled as “Jewish.” Concentration camps were set up for opponents of the regime. The new “racial science” classified Jews as non-Aryans and included as Jewish anyone who had one Jewish grandparent. Almost at once Jews were driven from public office, the civil service, teaching, and other professions. The Nuremberg laws of 1935 deprived Jews of all citizenship rights and forbade intermarriage or even sexual relations between Jews and non-Jews. On November 9, 1938, Kristallnacht, the “night of broken glass,” the anti-Semitism of Nazi Germany turned to fierce violence. When a 17-year-old Polish-Jewish student, distraught by the mistreatment of his parents, shot and killed a German diplomatic official in the German Embassy in Paris, Nazi storm troopers in a savage orgy of vandalism, looting, and incendiarism smashed Jewish shops, businesses, and synagogues in German cities; beat up thousands of Jews; and rounded up 30,000 to be sent to concentration camps. Party and government leaders moved in to control the storm troopers and to use anti-Semitism for their own purposes. The government levied a one billion-mark fine on the Jewish community for provoking the assault and collected the insurance payments for the shattered glass and other property damage. Jews who in the wake of these events belatedly tried to flee the country discovered that neither they nor their families could readily find places of refuge; the doors in Europe and the United States were for the most part closed to them. The events of 1938 in Germany still resembled an older-style pogrom, but they also expressed a radical new racism and foreshadowed the state-organized systematic destruction, in the Holocaust, of six million European Jews and of others in the grisly death camps.

The new totalitarian order was thought of as absolutely solid, and monolithic, like one huge single slab of rock in which no particle had any separate structure. Germany ceased to be federal; all the old states such as Prussia and Bavaria were abolished. All political parties except the National Socialists were destroyed. The Nazi party was itself violently purged on the night of June 30,1934, when many of the old Brownshirt leaders, those who represented the more social revolutionary wing of the movement, were accused of plotting against Hitler and were summarily shot. A secret political police, the Gestapo (Geheime Staatspolizei) and a system of permanent concentration camps in which thousands were detained without trial or sentence suppressed all persons who were deemed to be “un-German” and all ideas at variance with the Leader’s.

Law itself was defined as the will of the German people operating in the interests of the Nazi state (and with the Nazi regime as the sole interpreter of the German “will”). Churches, both Protestant and Catholic, continued to function but were “coordinated” with the new regime; their clergy were forbidden to criticize its activities, international religious ties were discouraged, and efforts were made to keep children out of religious schools. The government encouraged anti-Christian pagan movements and worship of the old Teutonic gods, but nothing was sponsored so much as worship of Nazism and its Führer. A Nazi Youth Movement and schools and universities indoctrinated the rising generation in the new concepts. The total, all-encompassing repression thwarted the efforts of a few dedicated Germans to develop a broad resistance movement.

Labor unions also were “coordinated”; they were replaced by a National Labor Front. Strikes were forbidden. Under the “leadership principle” employers were set up as small-scale Führers in their factories and industries and given extensive control, subject to close government supervision. On the positive side, an extensive public works program was launched, reforestation and swamp drainage projects were organized, housing and superhighways were built. A vast rearmament program absorbed the unemployed and within a short time unemployment disappeared. Even under Nazi statistics labor’s share in the national income was reduced, but workers had jobs; and an organization called Strength Through Joy attended to the needs of people with small incomes, providing entertainment, vacations, and travel for many who could never otherwise afford them.

The government assumed increasing controls over industry, while leaving ownership in private hands. In 1936 it adopted a Four-Year Plan of economic development. All countries after the Great Depression tended to economic nationalism, but Nazi Germany set up the goal of autarky and self-sufficiency—absolute independence from foreign trade. German chemists developed artificial rubber, plastics, synthetic textiles, and many other substitute products to enable the country to do without raw materials imported from overseas.

For Europe as a whole one of the basic economic problems, especially after the World War, was that while the Continent was economically a unit dependent on exchange between diverse regions, politically it was cut to pieces by tariff restrictions, currency differences, and hothouse industries artificially nurtured by nationalist ambition. The Nazis claimed to have a solution for this problem in a network of bilateral trade agreements assuring all neighboring peoples an outlet for their products. But it was a solution in which Germans were to be the most industrial and most advanced, the most powerful and wealthiest. Other Europeans were to be relegated to permanently inferior status. What could not be accomplished under trade agreements and economic penetration could be accomplished by conquest and war. Within a few years after 1933, although the regime had its share of bureaucratic confusion and personal rivalries, the Nazi revolution had turned Germany into a huge disciplined war machine, its internal foes liquidated or silenced, its mesmerized masses roaring their approval in giant demonstrations, ready to follow the Führer in storming new Valkyrian heights. “Today Germany,” went an ominous phrase; “tomorrow the whole world.”

Totalitarianism: Some Origins and Consequences

Totalitarianism was a many-sided thing. It had appeared first with the Bolshevik Revolution, for in the denial of individual liberty the Communist regime did not differ from the most extreme right-wing totalitarianism as manifested in Germany. Although Mussolini was the first to use the term “totalitarian,” and advance it explicitly as an ideology, the Fascist regime that he established lacked the all-embracing control over people’s lives to merit that term in its full political meaning. The Catholic Church came to terms with the regime, anti-Semitism did not appear until much later, the upper legislative house or Senate continued to function, and the king retained many of his prerogatives. As to the differences between Soviet totalitarianism and Naziism, they were important, at least in principle. Theoretically, the proletarian dictatorship was temporary; it did not at first glorify the individual Leader; and it was not nationalistic, for it rested on a principle of worldwide class struggle in all nations alike. It adopted a democratic-sounding constitution and paid at least lip service to individual rights. Its constitution officially condemned racism, and it did not deliberately and consciously cultivate an ethics of war and violence. But as time passed, Soviet totalitarianism or Communism became harder to distinguish from totalitarian regimes like Naziism. The Soviet dictatorship and one-party state seemed permanent; the hollowness of the constitution and the guarantee of individual rights became more apparent; a cult developed around the person of Stalin; the emphasis became more nationalistic, falling less on the workers of the world and more on the glories of the Soviet motherland; and it sent untold numbers to perish in the harsh labor camps of the Gulag.

Totalitarianism, as distinct from mere dictatorship, though it appeared rather suddenly after the First World War, was no historic freak. It was an outgrowth of a good deal of development in the past. The state was an institution that had continuously acquired new powers ever since the Middle Ages. The First World War continued and advanced the process. The twentieth-century totalitarian state, mammoth and monolithic, claiming absolute dominion over every department of life, carried this old development of state sovereignty to a new extreme. For centuries, for example, the state had clashed with the church. The twentieth-century dictators did the same. In addition, however, they were in most cases not merely anticlerical but explicitly anti-Christian, offering, or imposing, a “total” philosophy of life.

This new philosophy drew heavily upon historic nationalism, which it distorted and exaggerated. It rejected classical liberalism, which stressed the autonomy of rational individuals, and promoted instead an organic theory of society. It held that society was a kind of living organism within which the individual person was but a single cell. Individuals, in this theory, had no independent existence; they received life itself and all their ideas from the society, people, nation, or culture into which they were born and by which they were nurtured. In Marxism, the absolute subordination of individuals to their class came to much the same thing. Individuals were a microscopic cell, meaningless outside the social body. It made little sense, given such theories, to speak of the individual’s “reason” or “freedom,” to allow individuals to have their own opinions or to count up individual opinions to obtain a merely numerical majority. Valid ideas were those of the group as a whole, of the people or nation (or, in Marxism, the class) as a solid block. Even science was a product of specific societies; there was a “Nazi science” which was bound to differ in its conclusions from democratic bourgeois, Western, or “Jewish” science; and for the Soviets there was a Soviet science, consistent with dialectical materialism and better equipped to see the troth than the decadent bourgeois, capitalistic, or “fascist” science of the non-Soviet world. All art, too—music, painting, poetry, fiction, architecture, sculpture —was good art insofar as it expressed the society or nationality in which it appeared.

The avowed philosophy of totalitarian regimes was subjective. Whether an idea was held to be true depended on whose idea it was. Ideas of truth or beauty or right were not supposed to correspond to any outer or objective reality; they had only to correspond to the inner nature, interests, or point of view of the people, nation, society, or class that entertained such ideas. The older Enlightenment concepts of reason, natural law, natural right, and the ultimate alikeness of all mankind, or of a common path of all mankind in one course of progress, disappeared.

The totalitarian regimes did not simply declare, as a dry finding of social science, that peoples’ ideas were shaped by environment. They set about actively shaping ideas through the constant use of propaganda and by establishing propaganda offices as a principal branch of government. Propaganda was hardly new, but in the past, and still in the democratic countries, it had been a piecemeal affair, urging the public to accept this or that political party, or rally to this or that campaign. Now, like all else, it became “total.” Propaganda was monopolized by the state, and it demanded faith in a whole view of life and in every detail of this coordinated whole. Formerly the control of books and newspapers had been mainly negative; under Napoleon or Mettemich, for example, censors had forbidden statements on particular subjects, events, or persons. Now, in totalitarian countries, control of the press became frighteningly positive. The government manufactured thought. It manipulated opinion. It rewrote history. Writers were required to adopt whole ideologies; books, newspapers, magazines, and the radio diffused an endless and overwhelming cloud of words. Loudspeakers blared in the streets; gigantic blown-up photographs of the Leader looked down in public places. The propaganda experts were sometimes fanatics, but often they were cynics like Dr. Joseph Goebbels in Germany, too intelligent to be duped by the rubbish with which they duped their country.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1922-1938

                 Britain recognizes the Irish Free State with dominion status; first step toward full sovereignty as Republic of Ireland
October 1922     Mussolini takes power in Italy after the Fascist “March on Rome”
1923             Nazis fail to mobilize political support during an attempted Putsch in Munich
1924             First Labour government is elected in Britain under Ramsey MacDonald
January 1933     Hitler comes to power in Germany; Nazis soon take control of all state institutions and suppress opposition 
March 1933       Franklin D. Roosevelt introduces the “New Deal” in America to mitigate economic effects of the Great Depression
1934             Right-wing and fascist groups in France challenge the Third Republic with riots during the Stavisky Affair
1935             Nazis adopt Nuremberg laws against Jews
1936             Left-wing “Popular Front” comes to power in France under Leon Blum and enacts notable social reforms
1938             The Nazi regime encourages violent attacks on Jews and Jewish property during Kristallnacht—the night of “broken glass”

The very idea of empirical truth evaporated. No norm of human utterance remained except political expediency—the wishes and self-interest of those in power. No one could learn anything except what the government wanted people to know. No one could escape the omnipresent official doctrine, the insidious penetration of the very recesses of the mind by ideas planted by outsiders for their own purposes. People came to accept and even to believe the most extravagant statements when they were endlessly repeated, year after year. Barred from all independent sources of information, having no means by which any official allegation could be tested, the peoples of totalitarian countries became increasingly, in fact and not merely in sociological theory, incapable of the use of reason.

Racism, more characteristic of Nazi Germany than of totalitarianism in general, was a further exaggeration, or degradation, of older ideas of nationalism and national solidarity. It defined the nation in a tribal sense, as a biological entity, a group of persons possessing the same physical ancestry and the same or similar physical characteristics. Anti-Semitism was the most venomous form of racism in Europe. While a latent hostility to Jews had always been present in the Christian world, modern anti-Semitism had little to do with Christianity. It arose in part from the fact that in the nineteenth century with the removal of religious barriers, the Jews entered into general society and many achieved positions of prominence, especially in Germany, so that from the point of view of any resentful individual they could be represented as dangerous competitors in business or the professions. But most of all, anti-Semitism was inflamed by propagandists who wished people to feel their supposed racial purity more keenly or to forget the deeper problems of society, including poverty, class divisions, and economic inequities.

Totalitarianism was an escape from the realities of class conflict. It was a way of pretending that differences between rich and poor were of minor importance. Typically, a totalitarian regime came into power by stirring up class fears, then remained in power, and represented itself as indispensable by declaring that it had settled the class problem. Thus Mussolini, Hitler, and certain lesser dictators before seizing office pointed alarmingly to the dark menace of Bolshevism, and once in power, declared that all classes stood shoulder to shoulder in slablike solidarity behind the Leader.

Nor were events in Russia (or in China after the Second World War) altogether different. The Bolsheviks in 1917, armed with the ideas of Marx, aroused the workers against capitalists, landlords, the middle classes, and rich peasants; once in power and after extensive liquidations, they declared that the classless society had arrived, that no true social classes any longer existed, and that all citizens stood solidly behind a regime from which, they said, all good citizens benefited equally. Only the democracies admitted that they suffered from internal class problems, from maldistribution of wealth, or from social distinctions between favored and unfavored groups in society.

The dictatorships blamed their troubles on forces outside the country. They accused dissatisfied persons of conspiring with foreigners or refugees—with being the tools of Trotskyism, imperialism, or international Jewry. Or they talked of the struggle (as Mussolini did) between rich nations and poor nations, the “have” and the “have not” countries, and thus transformed the problem of poverty into an international struggle. In the distinction between “have” and “have not” countries there was, of course, more than a grain of truth; in more old-fashioned language some countries (such as the European democracies, as well as the United States and the British dominions of the 1930s) had progressed farther than others in their economic productivity and accumulation of wealth. It is probable that any propaganda is more effective if partly true. But when the totalitarians blamed their troubles on other countries and transformed the conflict between “have” and “have not” into a struggle between nations, they gave the signal that war might be a solution for social ills.

Violence, the acceptance and even glorification of violence, was indeed the characteristic most clearly distinguishing the totalitarian from the democratic systems. We have seen how a cult of violence, or belief that struggle was beneficial, had arisen before the First World War. The war itself habituated people to violence and direct action. Lenin and his followers showed how a small group could seize the helm of state under revolutionary or chaotic conditions. Mussolini in 1922 taught the same lesson, with further refinements; for the Italy in which he seized power was not at war, and it was merely the threat or possibility of revolution, not revolution itself, that provided him with his opportunity. In the 1920s, for the first time since the seventeenth century, some of the most civilized parts of Europe, in time of peace, saw private armies marching about the country, bands of uniformed and organized ruffians, Blackshirts or Brownshirts, who manhandled, abused, and even killed law-abiding citizens with impunity. Nor would anyone in the 1920s have believed that by the 1930s Europe would see the reintroduction of torture.

The very ethics of totalitarianism was violent and neopagan. It borrowed from and distorted Nietzsche and other prewar theoreticians, who, safe and civilized, had declared that people should live dangerously, avoid the flabby weakness of too much thought, and throw themselves with red-blooded vigor into a life of action. The new regimes all instituted youth movements. They appealed to a kind of juvenile idealism in which young people believed that by joining some kind of squad, donning some kind of uniform, and getting into the fresh air they contributed to a great moral resurgence of their country. Young men were taught to value their bodies but not their minds, to be tough and hard, and to regard mass gymnastics as patriotic demonstrations. Young women were taught to breed large families without complaint, to be content in the kitchen, and to look with awe upon their virile mates.

The body cult flourished while the mind decayed. Especially in National Socialism the ideal was to turn the German people into a race of splendid blond Nordics. Contrariwise, euthanasia was adopted for the chronically ill and the insane and was proposed for the aged. Nazi ideologists produced pseudoscientific racist theories to explain and justify their actions. Later, in the Second World War, when the Nazis overran eastern Europe, they committed Jews and others to gas chambers, destroying over six million human beings by the most scientific methods. Human beings were viewed as animals; one bred the kind one wanted and killed the kind one did not.

The Spread of Dictatorship

The trend toward dictatorship, if not necessarily of the totalitarian variety, spread in Europe in the 1930s. By 1938 only 10 out of 27 European countries remained democratic, in the sense that different political parties honestly competed for office and that citizens within generous limits thought and acted as they pleased. They were Great Britain and France; Holland, Belgium, and Switzerland; Czechoslovakia and Finland; and the three Scandinavian countries Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.

The promise of the early 1920s that constitutional and democratic government would flourish was thwarted. The weakness or absence of a parliamentary or democratic tradition, low education and literacy standards, the hostility of reactionary elements, the fear of Bolshevism, and the dissatisfaction of existing national minorities, all coupled with the economic strains resulting from the Great Depression, contributed to the collapse of representative institutions. Apart from the avowedly totalitarian or fascist regimes of Germany and Italy, the new dictatorships and authoritarian systems generally rested on a combination of personal and military power, but several reflected or absorbed some of the ideological features of a generic fascism. In Portugal, Salazar inaugurated a clerical-corporative dictatorship in 1932 that lasted for over four decades. In Austria, Dollfuss fused various right-wing political and military elements into a clerical-fascist “Christian” dictatorship which violently suppressed the Socialists and sought in vain to counter the German threat. In Spain General Franco established a right-wing authoritarian government after a bloody civil war (described in the next chapter). In many respects the dictatorships of Latin America under their caudillos and military juntas resembled the European military dictatorships; and similar repressive one-party regimes have reappeared in other parts of the world down to the present.

The authoritarian regimes were alike in repressing individual liberties, banning opposition parties, and abolishing or nullifying parliamentary institutions. Many borrowed features of fascism, establishing a corporative state, outlawing independent labor organizations, and forbidding strikes; many, like Hungary, Romania, and Poland, enacted anti-Semitic legislation. None of the right-wing regimes went so far as Hitler’s Third Reich in the total coordination of all political, economic, intellectual, and biological activities in a revolutionary mass-based dictatorship.

The acceptance and glorification of violence, it has been noted, was the feature most clearly distinguishing the totalitarian from the democratic systems. War in the Nazi and Fascist ethics was a noble thing, and the love of peace a sign of decadence. The Soviet regime by its own theory regarded war with non-Soviet powers as inevitable some day, but did not preach it as a positive moral good. The exaltation of war and struggle, the need for maintaining national solidarity, and the habit of blaming foreign countries for social troubles helped to make violence seem like a normal and appropriate means for strengthening the nation. These general ideological themes were intensified by the considerable armaments programs on which the dictatorships embarked and by the personal ambition and egotistical mania of individual dictators. All of this made the decade of the 1930s a time not only of domestic reaction but of recurrent international crises that led finally, in 1939, to a second and even greater world war.