Chapter 18

THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION AND THE SOVIET UNION

90. Backgrounds 

91. The Revolution of 1905

92. The Revolution of 1917

93. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

94. Stalin: The Five-Year Plans and the Purges

95. The International Impact of Communism, 1919-1939

The Russian Revolution became almost as important as the First World War in its influence on later twentieth-century events and global conflicts. Although the war of 1914-1918 was one of the decisive, short-term causes of the revolution, the far-reaching upheaval came also from numerous other social and political problems in Russian society—and the revolutionary ideas of the Bolshevik party attracted followers far beyond Russia itself. The Russian Revolution of 1917 can thus be compared in its historical magnitude with the French Revolution of 1789. Both originated in deep-lying and distant causes, and both made their repercussions felt in many countries for many years. The present chapter will examine the revolutionary process in Russia over half a century. We begin with the old regime before 1900, pass through the two revolutions of 1905 and 1917, and survey the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics down to 1939, at which time a new order had been consolidated under Joseph Stalin, a form of “planned economy” had been realized, and the last of the original revolutionaries, or Old Bolsheviks, either had been silenced or put to death.

The comparison of the Russian Revolution to the French is enlightening in many ways. Both claimed to be movements of liberation—the one against “feudalism” and “despotism”; the other against “capitalism” and “imperialism.” Neither was a strictly national movement dealing with merely domestic troubles; both addressed their message to all the world.

Both attracted followers in all countries. Both aroused a strong reaction on the part of those whose view of life was endangered. And both showed the same pattern of revolutionary politics: a relative unity of opinion so long as the problem was to overthrow the old regime, followed by disunity and conflict over the founding of the new, so that one set of revolutionaries eliminated others, until a small, organized, and determined minority (Jacobin democrats in 1793; Bolshevik communists in 1918) suppressed all opposition in order to defend or advance the revolutionary cause; and in short order (within a matter of months in France; years in Russia), many of the most intensely revolutionary leaders were themselves suppressed or liquidated.

The differences are equally deserving of notice. Relatively speaking, or compared by many criteria with other European countries. Russia in 1900 was in the rear, and France in 1780 in many ways was in the lead. The main strength of the French Revolution lay in the middle classes, who soon managed to prevail over more extreme pressures. In the Russian Revolution middle-class people were also active, especially at first, but they proved unable to cope with mass discontents and succumbed to a more radical party which appealed to workers and peasants. In France the Revolution just “happened,” so to speak, in that ordinary people from many walks of life unexpectedly found themselves in a revolutionary situation, and even the Jacobin dictatorship was improvised by individuals who had spent their lives thinking of other things. In Russia professional revolutionaries worked for the revolution long in advance, and the dictatorship of the Bolsheviks realized the plans and preparations of 20 years.

In France the revolution was followed by a reaction in which émigrés returned, dispossessed classes reappeared in politics, and even the Bourbons were restored. The French Revolution was followed by a century of uneasy compromise. The Russian Revolution effectively wiped out its opposition; few émigrés returned; no Romanovs regained their throne. The Russian Revolution was in this sense more immediately successful. But in the long run the differences reemerged. By the 1990s the ideas proclaimed in Russia in 1917 were in ruins, while those proclaimed in France in 1789 were widely accepted—representative constitutional government, equal civil rights under national sovereignty, and legal safeguards for persons and property.

The repercussions of the Russian Revolution were felt widely around the world because of Russia’s special position in global politics and economic affairs. Since the days of Peter the Great and before, it had always faced toward both Europe and Asia. It was European, yet it was also outside Europe and even opposed to it. If about 1900 it was the least developed of the major European countries, it was at the same time one of the most developed, industrialized, or modernized parts of the non-European world. Its revolution could win sympathy on the left in Europe because it reinforced the old European socialist objections to capitalism. It aroused the interests of peoples in other continents because it also denounced economic imperialism and the possession of colonies by Europeans, affirming that imperialism was merely the “highest stage” of capitalism and that both must be overthrown together. The Soviet Union, once established, came to occupy an intermediate position between the West and the colonial world (or what later came to be called the Third World). In the West it would long be feared or admired as the last word in social revolution. In the colonial, or formerly colonial, world it suggested new beginnings, a new way to become modern without being capitalistic or Western, a step in a worldwide rebellion against Western supremacy. The Russian Revolution thus not only produced communism and hence fascism in Europe but also added strength to the emerging anticolonial movements in Asia and elsewhere.

Although professional revolutionaries worked for revolution in Russia, they did not “cause” it. Lenin and the Bolsheviks did not bring about the Russian Revolution. They captured it after it had begun. They boarded the ship in midstream. The Russian Revolu tion, like all great revolutions, originated in a totality of previous history, in diverse local causes, and in the prolonged dissatisfaction of many kinds of people.

90. BACKGROUNDS

Russia after 1881: Reaction and Progress

We have seen in earlier chapters how the tsarist autocracy arose, how it ruled as a machine superimposed upon its subjects, how the upper class became westernized while the masses sank further into serfdom, and how an intelligentsia developed, divorced both from the work of government and the activities of the people. It has been explained in Chapter 13 how Alexander II freed the serfs in 1861 and created provincial and district councils or zemstvos, elected mainly by landowners, which attended to such matters as roads, schools, and hospitals.

In 1881 Alexander II was assassinated by members of the revolutionary group called the People’s Will. His son, Alexander III (1881-1894), tried to stamp out revolutionism and to silence even peaceable criticism of the government. Revolutionaries and terrorists were driven into exile. The People’s Will as an organized group became extinct. Jews were subjected to pogroms, by far the worst of any (until then) in modern times. For the first time the empire adopted a program of systematic Russification. Poles, Ukrainians, Lithuanians, the peoples of the Caucasus, the scattered German communities, the Muslim groups in central Asia—all faced the prospect of forcible assimilation to Russian culture. The philosopher and chief official of this movement was Pobiedonostsev, procurator of the Holy Synod, or layman head, under the tsar, of the Russian Orthodox church. Pobiedonostsev saw in the West something alien and doomed; and he dreamed of turning Holy Russia into a kind of churchly community, in which a disciplined clergy should protect the faithful from the insidious influence of the West.

This is not, however, what happened. In the closing decades of the nineteenth century Russia became more than ever before a part of European civilization. Almost overnight it presented Europe with great works of literature and music that Europeans could appreciate. The nineteenth-century Russian novel became known throughout the Western world. All could read the novels of Tolstoy (1828-1910) without a feeling of strangeness; and if characters in the novels of Turgenev (1818-1883) and of Dostoevski (1821-1881) behaved more strangely, the authors themselves were obviously within the great European cultural family. The melodies of Tchaikovsky (1840-1893) and of Rimsky-Korsakov (1844-1908) became familiar throughout Europe and America; if they sometimes seemed hauntingly wild, distant, or sad, they still betrayed no more than the usual amount of national idiosyncrasy. Russians also contributed to the sciences, notably chemistry. They were known to be especially talented in the more abstruse intellectual exercises, such as higher mathematics, physics, or chess.

Russia also, from the 1880s, began to pass through the Industrial Revolution and take its place as an integral part of the world economic system. European capital entered the country, financing railways, mines, and factories (as well as government and the army) until by 1914 Europeans had about the same amount invested in Russia as in the United States, some $4 billion in each case. In 1897, under the reforming ministry of Count Witte, Russia adopted the gold standard, making its currency readily convertible with all others. In the quarter-century between 1888 and 1913 the Russian railway mileage more than doubled, the miles of telegraph wires multiplied fivefold, the number of post offices trebled, and the number of letters carried by the mails multiplied seven times.

Although still industrially undeveloped by Western standards, Russia was industrializing rapidly. Exports rose in value from 400 million rubles in 1880 to 1.6 billion in 1913. Imports, though smaller, grew more rapidly, quintupling in the same period. They consisted of such items as tea and coffee and of the machines and industrial goods made in western Europe.

Industrialization, in Russia as in all countries, brought an increase both of the business and of the wage-earning classes, or, in socialist terminology, of the bourgeoisie and of the proletariat. Though growing, they were still not numerous by standards of the West. Factory workers, laboring for 11 or more hours a day for low wages under hard conditions, were in somewhat the same position as in England or France before 1850. Unions were illegal and strikes were prohibited. Nevertheless, great strikes in the 1890s called attention to the misery of the new industrial workers. There was one distinctive feature to the Russian proletariat. Russian industry was heavily concentrated; half of Russia’s industrial workers were employed in factories employing over 500 persons. It was easier for workers under such circumstances to be organized economically and at the proper time to be mobilized politically. As for the Russian business and capitalist class, it was relatively the weaker because of several features in the situation. Ownership of much of Russia’s new industrial plant was in foreign hands. Much was owned by the tsarist government itself; Russia already had the largest state-operated economic system in the world. Moreover, in Russia (unlike the United States at the time) the government itself was a heavy borrower from Europe; hence it was less dependent financially on its own people and more able to maintain an absolutist regime.

Nevertheless, the rising business and professional classes, reinforced by enterprising landowners, were strong enough to form a liberal segment of public opinion, which emerged in 1905 as the Constitutional Democratic party (or “Cadets”). Many of those who were active in the provincial zemstvos also became Constitutional Democrats. They were liberals, progressives, or constitutionalists in the Western sense, thinking less about the troubles of factory workers and peasants than about the need for a nationally elected parliament to control the policies of state.

Russia remained predominantly agricultural. Its huge exports were mainly farm and forest products. The peasants formed four-fifths of the population. Free from their former lords since 1861, they lived in village communes called mirs. In most communes much of the land was divided and redivided among peasant households by agreement of the village community, nor could anyone leave without communal permission. The peasants still carried a considerable burden. Until 1906 they paid redemption money arising from the Emancipation of 1861, and even after that, other forms of onerous payments. They also paid high taxes, for the government defrayed the interest on its foreign loans from taxes raised at home. The constantly rising export of cereals (also used to pay off debts contracted by Russia in the West) tended to keep food from the farmer’s table; many peasants raised the best wheat for sale and ate black bread themselves. The farm population, in short (as in other countries in similar stages of their development), bore a considerable share of the costs of industrialization.

Under such pressures, and because of their crude methods of cultivation, the peasants were forever demanding more land. “Land hunger” was felt both by individual families and by the mirs. The Emancipation had turned over roughly half the land to peasant ownership, individual and collective; and in the following half-century the peasants added to their share by buying from nonpeasant owners. The mirs were by no means obsolescent. They were in fact flourishing; they acquired far more land by purchase than did individual buyers, and perhaps half or more of the peasants valued communal security above the uncertain pleasures of private property. The exceptions were the minority of more enterprising and wealthier peasants, later called the kulaks. These “big farmers” stood out conspicuously from the impoverished mass of peasants, by whom they were often disliked.

The Emergence of Revolutionary Parties

The peasants were the ancient source of revolutionary disturbance in Russia. After the Emancipation in 1861 they continued to believe that they had some kind of rights in all the land of former estates on which they had formerly been serfs—not merely in the portion that had been allotted to peasant possession. They demanded (and obtained) credit from the government to buy from the big landowners or former masters. Their land hunger could not be appeased. They remained jealous of the landed aristocrat’s very existence. In Russia, as elsewhere in Europe, and unlike the United States, the rural population was divided into two sharply distinct classes—on the one hand, the peasants of all types who worked the soil, and on the other, the gentry who resided upon it. The two never intermarried. They differed not merely economically but in speech, dress, and manners, and even in the looks of their faces and hands. But in the last three decades of the nineteenth century the Russian peasants were notably quiet. Insurrectionism seemingly subsided.

The other traditional source of revolutionary disturbance lay among the intelligentsia. Revolutionary intelligentsia (as distinguished from those who were simply liberal or progressive) held a violent contempt for the Russian empire and yearned for a catastrophic overthrow of the tsardom. Since the days of the Decembrists in 1825 they had formed secret organizations, comprising a few hundred or thousands of members, engaged in outwitting the tsarist police, by whom they were bafflingly interpenetrated. At a Bolshevik party congress held in 1913, out of 22 delegates present, no fewer than five, unknown to the others, were government spies.

The revolutionary intelligentsia, since there was normally little that they could do, spent their time in vehement discussion and interminable refinement of doctrine. By 1890 the terrorism and nihilism of the 1870s were somewhat pass£. The great question was where these willing officers of a revolutionary movement could find an army. Disputation turned upon such topics as whether the peasants or the new factory workers were the true revolutionary class, whether the peasants were potentially proletarian or incurably petty bourgeois, whether Russia was bound to experience the same historical process as the West, or whether it was different; and, specifically, whether Russia had to go through capitalism or might simply skip the capitalist stage in reaching the socialist society.

Most of the revolutionary intelligentsia were “populists.” Some had once belonged to the now broken People’s Will. Some continued to approve of terrorism and assassination as morally necessary in an autocratic country. They generally had a mystical faith in the vast inchoate might of the Russian people, and since most Russians were peasants, the populists were interested in peasant problems and peasant welfare.

They believed that a great native revolutionary tradition existed in Russia, of which the peasant rebellion of Pugachev, in 1773, was the chief example. The populists admired the mir, in which they saw the European socialist idea of a “commune” represented. They read and respected Marx and Engels (indeed, a populist first translated the Communist Manifesto into Russian); but they did not believe that an urban proletariat was the only true revolutionary class or that socialism had to evolve historically out of capitalism. They said that in Russia the horrors of capitalism could be skipped. They addressed themselves to the plight of the farmer and the evils of landlordism, favored strengthening the mir and equalizing the shares of all peasants in it; and, since they did not believe that socialism would have to emerge from the prior triumph of capitalism in Russia, they thought that revolution might come quite soon. This populist sentiment crystallized in the founding in 1901 of the Social Revolutionary party.

Two populists, Plekhanov and Axelrod, fleeing to Switzerland in the 1870s, founded in exile the organization from which the Russian Social Democratic or Marxist party was to grow. A few Marxists began to declare themselves (though not publicly) in Russia itself. When the youthful Lenin met his future wife N. K. Krupskaya in 1894, she already belonged to a circle of argumentative Marxists. The fact that the peasants in the 1890s were disappointingly quiescent while machine industry, factor labor, and strikes were developing rapidly turned many of the revolutionary intelligentsia, though only a minority, from populism to Marxism. To Plekhanov and Axelrod were added, as young leaders, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (1870-1924), Leon Trotsky (1879-1940), Joseph V. Stalin (1879-1953), and others.

Of these it was Lenin who, after Marx, was to be claimed by communism as a father. Lenin was a short almost rotund man, with a bounding quickness and intense, penetrating gaze. High cheekbones and somewhat slanting eyes showed an Asian strain on the paternal side. His hair receded in early youth, leaving a massive forehead, behind which a restless mind was inexhaustibly at work. Even in his 20s he was called the Old One. He was of upper-middle-class origin, son of an inspector of schools who rose in the civilian bureaucracy to a rank equivalent to major general. His boyhood was comfortable and even happy, until the age of 17, when his elder brother, a student at St. Petersburg, became somewhat incidentally involved in a plot to assassinate Alexander III, for which he was put to death by order of the tsar himself. Because of the blot on the family record it became impossible for Lenin to continue with his law studies. He soon joined the ranks of professional revolutionaries, having no other occupation and living precariously from the party funds, which came mainly from the donations of well-to-do sympathizers.

Arrested as a revolutionary, he spent three years of exile in Siberia. Here the tsarist government treated educated political prisoners with an indulgence not later shown by the Soviet regime. Lenin and most of the others lived in cottages of their own or boarded with local residents. No labor was required of them. They borrowed books from Europe; met and visited with one another; debated, played chess, went hunting, and wrote. They chafed, however, at being cut off from the mainstream of Russian political life back home. Lenin, his term over, proceeded in 1900 to western Europe, where except for short secret trips to Russia he remained until 1917. His intellectual vigor, irresistible drive, and shrewdness as a tactician soon made him a force in the party. Genius has been called the faculty for everlasting concentration upon one thing. Lenin, said his one-time close associate Axelrod, “for twenty-four hours of the day is taken up with the revolution, has no thoughts but thoughts of revolution, and even in his sleep dreams of nothing but revolution.”

In 1898 the Marxists in Russia, spurred on by émigrés, founded the Social Democratic Labor party. They were not more revolutionary than the larger group of Social Revolutionaries. They simply had a different conception of the revolution. First of all, as good Marxists, they were more inclined to see the revolution as an international movement, part of the dialectical process of world history in which all countries were involved. Russia for them was no different from other countries except that is was less advanced. They expected the world revolution to break out first in the industrial societies of western Europe. They particularly admired the German Social Democratic party, the largest and most flourishing of all the parties that acknowledged the fatherhood of Marx.

If the Social Democrats were more oriented to Europe than the Social Revolutionaries, it was because so many of their spokesmen lived there in exile. They tended to think that Russia must develop capitalism, an industrialist proletariat, and the modern form of class straggle before there could be any revolution. Seeing in the urban proletariat the true revolutionary class, they looked upon the peasantry with suspicion, ridiculed the mir, and abhorred the Social Revolutionaries. Like Marx himself, the Russian Marxists disapproved of sporadic terrorism and assassination. For this reason, and because their doctrine seemed somewhat academic and their revolution seemed rather conditional and far in the future, the Marxists were for a time actually favored by the tsarist police, who regarded them as less dangerous than the Social Revolutionaries.

Split in the Social Democrats: Bolsheviks and Mensheviks

The Russian Marxists held a second party congress in Brussels and London in 1903, attended by émigrés like Lenin and delegates from the underground in Russia, and by Social Democrats and members of lesser organizations. The purpose of the congress was to unify all Russian Marxism, but in fact it split it forever. The two resulting factions called themselves Bolshevik, or majority, and Menshevik, or minority. Lenin was the main author of the split and hence the founder of Bolshevism. Although after 1903 it was usually the Mensheviks who had the majority, Lenin clung proudly and stubbornly to the term Bolshevism, with its favorable connotation of a majority in his support. For a number of years after 1903 the Social Democrats remained at least formally a single Marxist party, but they were now irreconcilably divided into two wings. In 1912 the Bolshevik wing organized itself as a separate party.

Bolshevism, or Leninism, originally differed from Menshevism mainly on matters of organization and tactics. Lenin believed that the party should be a small revolutionary elite, a hard core of reliable and zealous workers. Those who favored a larger and more open party, with membership for mere sympathizers, became Mensheviks. Lenin insisted upon a strongly centralized party, without autonomy for national or other component groups. He demanded strong authority at the top, by which the central committee would determine the doctrine (or party line) and control personnel at all levels of the organization. The Mensheviks favored a greater degree of influence by the membership as a whole. Lenin thought that the party would strengthen itself by purges, expelling all who developed deviations of opinion. The Mensheviks favored covering up or bridging over all but the most fundamental disagreements. The Mensheviks came to recommend cooperation with liberals, progressives, and bourgeois democrats. Lenin regarded such cooperation as purely tactical and temporary, never concealing that in the end the Bolsheviks must impose their views through a dictatorship of the proletariat. The Mensheviks, in short, came to resemble the Marxists of western Europe, so far as that was possible under Russian conditions. Lenin stood for the rigid reaffirmation of Marxian fundamentals—dialectical materialism and irreconcilable class struggle.

Lenin accepted and added little to Marx’s governing ideas: that capitalism exploited the workers; that history was shaped by economic forces and was moving toward socialism; that class struggle was the law of society; and that existing forms of religion, government, philosophy, and morals were weapons of the ruling class. He did, however, develop and transform certain theories of imperialism and of the “uneven development of capitalism” that had been propounded in only general terms by Marx and Engels. According to this Leninist elaboration of earlier Marxist theory, “imperialism” was exclusively a product of monopoly capitalism, that is, capitalism in its “highest” and “final” stage, which develops differently and at different times in each country. Monopoly capitalism was bent on exporting surplus capital and investing it in underdeveloped areas for greater profits. The unceasing drive for colonies and markets in a world already almost completely partitioned leads inevitably to international imperialist wars for the redistribution of colonies, as well as to intensified national colonial struggles for independence; both provide new revolutionary opportunities for the proletariat.

In other respects, Lenin roundly denounced all who attempted to “add” anything to the fundamental principles of Marx. Nothing infuriated him so much as revisionist efforts to tone down the class struggle or hints that Marxism might in the last analysis perhaps find room for some kind of religion. As he wrote in 1908: “From the philosophy of Marxism, cast of one piece of steel, it is impossible to expunge a single basic premise, a single essential part, without deviating from objective truth, without falling into the arms of bourgeois-reactionary falsehood.” Lenin was a convert. He discovered Marxism; he did not invent it. He found in it a theory of revolution which he accepted without reservation as scientific and on which he was more outspokenly dogmatic even than Marx himself. His powers of mind, which were great, were spent in demonstrating how the unfolding events of the twentieth century confirmed the analysis of the master.

It was by his powers of will that Lenin was most distinguished, and if Leninism contributed little to Marxism as a theory, it contributed a great deal to it as a movement. Lenin was an activist. He was the supreme agitator, a field commander in the class war who could dash off a polemical pamphlet, dominate a party congress, or address throngs of workers with equal ease.

Beside him, Marx and Engels seem almost to be mere recluses or sociologists. Marx and Engels had preferred to believe that the dictatorship of the proletariat, when it came, would represent the wishes of the great majority in a society in which most people had become proletarians. Lenin more frankly foresaw the possibility that the proletarian dictatorship might represent the conscious wishes of a small vanguard and might have to impose itself on great masses by an unshrinking use of force.

Above all, Lenin developed Marx’s idea of the role of the party. He drew on the rich experience of pre-Marxist revolutionaries in Russia—the mysterious use of false names, invisible ink, secret ciphers, forged passports, and hidden meeting places—the whole conspiratorial wonderland which, when it existed to a lesser degree in the West before 1848, drew Marx’s scorn and laughter. Lenin’s conception of the party was basically Marx’s, reinforced by his own experience as a Russian. The party was an organization in which intellectuals provided leadership and understanding for workers, who could not see so clearly for themselves. For trade unionism, concerned only with the day-to-day demands of workers, Lenin had even less patience than Marx. “The unconscious growth of the labor movement,” he wrote, “takes the form of trade unionism, and trade unionism signifies the mental enslavement of the workers to the bourgeoisie.” The task of intellectuals in the party was to make the trade unions and the workers class-conscious and hence revolutionary. Armed with “objective” knowledge, known to be correct, the party leadership naturally could not listen to the subjective opinions of others—the passing ideas of laborers, peasants, mistaken party subordinates, or other parties pretending to know more than Marx himself. The idea that intellectuals supply the brains and workers the brawn, that an elite leads while the toilers meekly follow, is understandable enough in view of the Russian background, which had created on the one hand a highly self-conscious intelligentsia and on the other a repressed working class and peasantry deprived of all opportunity for political experience of their own. The insistence on a leading and powerful role for the party elite became one of the most distinctive traits of Leninism and one of the most foreign to the democratic movements of the West.

Leninism accomplished the marriage of Russian revolutionary traditions with the Western doctrine of Marxism. It was an improbable marriage, whose momentous offspring was to be communism. But at the time, when Bolshevism first appeared in 1903, it had little or no effect. When revolution first broke out in Russia in 1905, it took the revolutionary 6migr6s almost entirely by surprise.

91. THE REVOLUTION OF 1905

Background and Revolutionary Events

The almost simultaneous founding at the turn of the century of the Constitutional Democratic, Social Revolutionary, and Social Democratic parties was clearly a sign of mounting discontent. None of these was as yet a party that tried to get candidates elected to office, for there were no elections in Russia above the provincial zemstvo level. All three parties were propaganda agencies, made up of leaders without followers, intellectuals who followed various lines of thought. All, even those who became Constitutional Democrats, were watched by the police and obliged to do most of their work underground. At the same time, after 1900, there were signs of growing popular unrest. Peasants were trespassing on lands of the gentry and even rising in local insurrections against landlords and tax collectors. Factory workers sporadically refused to work. But with these popular movements none of the new parties had formed any solid links.

The government refused to make concessions of any kind. The tsar, Nicholas II, who had mounted the throne in 1894, was a man of narrow outlook. Tutored in his youth by Pobiedonostsev, the lay leader of the Russian Orthodox church, he regarded all ideas questioning autocracy, Orthodoxy, and Great Russian nationalism as un-Russian. That persons in the government should be controlled by interests outside the government—the mildest liberalism or most orderly democracy—seemed to the tsar, the tsarina, and the leading officials to be a monstrous aberration. Autocracy, for them, was the best and only, as it was the God-given, form of government for Russia.

The chief minister, Plehve, and the circles at court hoped that a short successful war with Japan would create more attachment to the government. The war went so badly that its effect was the reverse. Critics of the regime (except for the handful of the most internationalist Marxists) were sufficiently patriotic to be ashamed at the ease with which Russia was defeated by an upstart, Asian power. As after the Crimean War, there was a general feeling that the government had exposed its incompetence to all the world. Liberals believed that its secret methods, its immunity to criticism or control, had made it sluggish, obstinate, and inefficient, unable either to win a war or to lead the economic modernization that was taking place in Russia. But there was little that the liberals could do.

The police had recently allowed a priest, Father Gapon, to try to organize the St. Petersburg factory workers, hoping thus to counter the propaganda of revolutionaries. Father Gapon took up their grievances in all seriousness. They believed, as uneducated peasants only recently transplanted to the city, that if only they could reach the ear of the tsar, whom they called the Little Father, he would hear their complaints with shocked surprise and rectify the evils that afflicted Russia. They drew up a petition, asking for an eight-hour day, a minimum daily wage of one ruble (50 cents), a repudiation of bungling bureaucrats, and a democratically elected Constituent Assembly to introduce representative government into the empire. Unarmed, peaceable, respectful, singing “God save the Tsar,” a crowd of 200,000—men, women, and children—gathered before the tsar’s Winter Palace one Sunday in January 1905. But the tsar was not in the city, and his officials were fearful. Troops marched up and shot down the demonstrators in cold blood, killing several hundred.

“Bloody Sunday” in St. Petersburg snapped the moral bond upon which all stable government rests. The horrified workers saw that the tsar was not their friend. The autocracy stood revealed as the force behind the hated officials, the tax collectors, the landlords, and the owners of the industrial plants. A wave of political strikes broke out. Social Democrats (more Mensheviks than Bolsheviks) appeared from the underground or from exile to give revolutionary direction to these movements. Councils or “soviets” of workers were formed in Moscow and St. Petersburg. The peasants, too, in many parts of the country spontaneously began to erupt, overrunning the lands of the gentry, burning manor houses and doing violence to their owners. Social Revolutionaries naturally tried to take over this movement. The liberal Constitutional Democrats—professors, engineers, business people, lawyers, and leaders in the provincial zemstvos founded 40 years before—tried also to seize leadership or at least use the crisis to force the government’s hand. All agreed on one demand: that there should be more democratic representation in the government.

The tsar yielded grudgingly and as little as possible. In March 1905 he promised to call to office men “enjoying the confidence of the nation.” In August (after the ruinous defeat in the naval battle of Tsushima) he agreed to call a kind of Estates General, for which peasants, landowners, and city people should vote as separate classes. Still the revolution raged unchecked. The St. Petersburg Soviet, or workers’ council, led mainly by Mensheviks (Lenin had not yet reached Russia), declared a great general strike in October.

Railroads stopped, banks closed, newspapers ceased to appear, and even lawyers refused to go to their offices. The strike spread to other cities and to the peasants. With the government paralyzed, the tsar issued his October Manifesto. It promised a constitution, civil liberties, and a Duma to be elected by all classes alike, with powers to enact laws and control the administration.

The tsar and his advisers intended to divide the opposition by releasing the October Manifesto, and in this they succeeded. The Constitutional Democrats, with a Duma promised, allowed themselves to hope that social problems could henceforth be dealt with by parliamentary methods. Liberals were now afraid of revolutionaries, industrialists feared the strength shown by labor in the general strike, and landowners demanded a restoration of order among the peasants. Aroused peasants and workers were not yet satisfied: the former still wanted more land and less taxation; the latter, a shorter working day and a living wage. The several branches of revolutionary intellectuals worked upon the continuing popular agitation, hoping to carry matters forward until the tsarist monarchy was abolished and a socialist republic was established with themselves at its head. They believed also (and correctly) that the October Manifesto was in any case a deception, which the tsar would refuse to adhere to as soon as revolutionary pressure was removed. The soviets continued to seethe, local strikes went on, and there were mutinies among soldiers at Kronstadt and sailors in the Black Sea fleet.

But the government was able to maintain itself. With the middle-class liberals now inactive or demanding order, the authorities arrested the members of the St. Petersburg Soviet. Peace was hastily made with Japan, and reliable troops were recalled from the Far East. The revolutionary leaders fled back to Europe, or again went underground, or were caught and sent to prison or to Siberia; executions were carried out in the countryside. The Revolution of 1905 would prove to be only a dress rehearsal for the revolution to come in 1917.

The Results of 1905: The Duma

The chief apparent result of the Revolution of 1905 was to make Russia, at least ostensibly, into a parliamentary type of state like the rest of Europe. The promised Duma was convoked. For ten years, from 1906 to 1916, Russia had at least the superficial attributes of a semiconstitutional monarchy.

But Nicholas II soon showed that he did not intend to yield much. He drew the teeth of the new Duma before the assembly could even be bom, by announcing in advance, in 1906, that it would have no power over foreign policy, the budget, or government personnel. His attitude toward constitutional monarchy continued until 1917 to be entirely negative; the one concession that tsarism would not allow was any real participation in government by the public. Within this “public” the two extreme fringes were equally impervious to liberal constitutionalism. On the Right, stubborn upholders of pure autocracy and the Orthodox church organized the Black Hundreds, terrorizing the peasantry and urging them to boycott the Duma. On the Left, in 1906, the Social Revolutionaries and both the Bolshevik and Menshevik wings of the Social Democrats likewise refused to recognize the Duma, urged workers to boycott it, and refused to put up any candidates for election.

The short-lived first Duma was elected in 1906 by a system of indirect and unequal voting, in which peasants and workers voted as separate classes, and with proportionately far less representation than was granted to the landlords. In the absence of socialist candidates, workers and peasants voted for all sorts of people, including the liberal Constitutional Democrats (the Cadets), who obtained a sweeping majority. The Cadets, when the Duma met, found themselves still fighting for the bare principle of constitutional government. They demanded true universal male suffrage and the responsibility of ministers to a parliamentary majority. The tsar’s response was to dismiss the Duma after two months.

A second Duma was elected in 1907, with the government trying to control the elections through suppression of party meetings and newspapers, but since Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks now consented to take part, some 83 socialists were elected. The Cadets, becoming fearful of the revolutionary Left, concluded that constitutional progress must be gradual and showed a willingness to cooperate with the government. But the Duma came to an abrupt end when the government denounced and arrested some 50 socialists as revolutionaries bent only on destruction. A third Duma, elected after an electoral change that gave increased representation to the landed propertied class and guaranteed a conservative majority, managed to hold several sessions between 1907 and 1912, as did a fourth Duma from 1912 to 1916. The deputies, by following the lead of the government, by addressing themselves only to concrete issues, by losing themselves in committee work, and by avoiding the basic question of where supreme power lay, kept precariously alive a modicum of parliamentary institutions in the tsarist empire.

The Stolypin Reforms

Some officials believed that the way to checkmate the revolutionaries and strengthen the hold of the monarchy was for the government, while keeping all controls in its own hands, to attract the support of reasonable and moderate people by a program of reforms. One of these reformers was Peter Stolypin, whom the tsar retained as his principal minister from 1906 to 1911. It was Stolypin who dissolved the first two Dumas. But it was not his policy merely to stand still. His aim was to build up the propertied classes as friends of the state. He believed, perhaps rightly, that a state actively supported by widespread private property had little to fear from doctrinaire intellectuals, conspirators, and émigrés. He therefore favored and broadened the powers of the provincial zemstvos, in which the larger landowners took part in administering local affairs. For the peasantry he put through legislation more sweeping than any since the Emancipation, allowing peasants to sell their shares in the communal land of the mirs and leave their villages. Peasants also gained the right to acquire private control over land and to buy property from the communes or the gentry.

The Stolypin policy was successful. Between 1907 and 1916,6.2 million families out of 16 million who were eligible applied for legal separation from the mir. There was no mistaking the trend toward individual property and independent farming. But the results of the Stolypin program must not be exaggerated. The mir was far from broken. A vast majority of peasants were still involved in the old system of common rights and communal restrictions. The land shortage was still acute in the agricultural areas where yields were highest. Land hunger and poverty continued in the countryside. There were the new big farmers— the kulaks—to be resented and envied, but the largest landed proprietors were still the gentry. About 30,000 landlords owned nearly 200 million acres of land, and another 200 million acres made up other large landed estates.

Stolypin was not left long to carry on his program. The tsar gave him only an unwilling support. Reactionary circles disliked his tampering ways and his Western orientation. Social Revolutionaries naturally cried out against dissolution of the communes. Even Marxists, who should in theory have applauded the advance of capitalism in Russia, feared that Stolypin’s reforms might do away with agrarian discontent. “I do not expect to live to see the revolution,” said Lenin in these years. Stolypin was shot dead while attending the theater in Kiev, in the presence of the tsar and tsarina, in 1911. The assassin, a member of the terrorist wing of the Social Revolutionaries, is thought also to have been a secret agent of the reactionary tsarist police. It may be added that Stolypin’s predecessor, Plehve, and about a dozen other high officials within the past few years had similarly died at the hands of assassins.

But all in all, despite its violence and repression, the Russian empire on the eve of the First World War was moving in a Western direction. Its industries were growing, its railways were expanding, and its exports were almost half as great in value as those of the United States. It had a parliament, if not a parliamentary government. Private property and individualist capitalism were spreading to new layers of the people. There was a guarded freedom of the press, illustrated, for example, by the legal and open establishment of the Bolshevik party paper, Pravda (or Truth), in St. Petersburg in 1912. It is not possible to say how far this development might have gone, for it was menaced on both the Right and the Left by obstinate reactionaries upholding the absolute tsardom and by revolutionaries whom nothing but the end of tsardom and wholesale transformation of society could appease. But both extremes were discouraged. The desperation of extreme reactionaries in the government, the feeling that they might in any case soon lose their position, perhaps made them the more willing to precipitate a European war by armed support of Serbian nationalists. As for the revolutionary parties, and especially the Bolsheviks, they were losing in membership on the eve of the war; their leaders lived year after year in exile, dreaming of the great days of 1905 which stubbornly failed to repeat themselves and sometimes pessimistically admitting, as Lenin did, that there might be no revolution in their time.

92. THE REVOLUTION OF 1917

End of the Tsardom . The Revolution of March 1917

War again put the tsarist regime to a test that it could not meet. In this war, more total than any had ever been, willing cooperation between government and people was indispensable to success. This essential prerequisite the tsarist empire did not have. National minorities—Poles, Ukrainians, the peoples of the Caucasus, Jews, and others—were disaffected. As for the socialists, who in every other European parliament voted for funds to finance the war, the dozen otherwise disunited socialists in the Duma refused to do so and were promptly jailed. The ordinary worker and peasant marched off with the army, but without the sense of personal conviction felt by common people in Germany and the West. More decisive was the attitude of the middle class. Because they patriotically wished Russia to win, the glaring mismanagement of the government was the more intolerable to them. The Russian disasters at the battles of Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes, with which the war opened in 1914, were followed by the advance of the Central Powers into Russia in 1915, at the cost of 2 million Russian soldiers killed, wounded, or captured.

At the war’s outbreak middle-class people, as in all countries, offered their assistance to the government. The provincial zemstvos formed a union of all zemstvos in the empire to facilitate the mobilization of agriculture and industry. Business groups at Petrograd (as St. Petersburg was renamed during the war) formed a commercial and industrial committee to get the factories into maximum production. The government distrusted these signs of public activity arising outside official circles. On the other hand, organized in this way, middle-class people became conscious of their own strength and more critical of the bureaucracy. Rumors spread that some officials in the war ministry itself were pro-German, reactionaries who feared the liberalism of England and France with which Russia was allied.

Life at court was bizarre even for Russia. The tsarina Alexandra, German by origin, looked upon all Russians outside her own circle with contempt, incited her husband to play the proud and pitiless autocrat, and took advice from a self-appointed holy man, the mysterious Rasputin. She was convinced that Rasputin possessed supernatural and prophetic powers, because he had apparently cured her young son of hemophilia. Rasputin, by his influence over her, had a voice in appointments to high office. All who wished an audience with the imperial pair had to go through him. Patriotic and enlightened persons of all classes vainly protested. In these circumstances, and given the military defeats, the union of zemstvos and other such wartime bodies complained not merely of faults of administration but of fundamental conditions in the state. The government responded by holding them at arm’s length. The tsarist regime, caught in a total war, was afraid of the help offered by its own people.

During the war, in September 1915, the Duma was suspended. The war thus revived all the basic political issues that had been latent since the Revolution of 1905. The union of zemstvos demanded restoration of the Duma, which reassembled in November 1916 and expressed loud indignation at the way affairs were conducted. Among all elements of the population, dissatisfaction with the course of the war and with the government’s ineptitude mounted. In December Rasputin was assassinated by nobles at the court. The tsar began to consider repression and again adjourned the Duma. Machine guns were issued to the police. Members of the Duma and of the new extragovernmental bodies concluded that the situation could be saved only by force. It is when moderate persons, normally concerned with their own business, come to such conclusions that revolution becomes a political possibility. The shift of moderates and liberals, their need of a coup d’état to save themselves from

reactionaries, likewise raised the long-awaited prospects of the minority of professional revolutionaries.

Again it was the workers of Petrograd who precipitated the crisis. Food had become scarce, as in all the belligerent countries. But the tsarist administration was too clumsy and too demoralized by graft to institute the controls that had become usual elsewhere, such as maximum prices and ration cards. It was the poorest who felt the food shortage most keenly. On March 8,1917, food riots broke out, which soon developed, doubtless with the help of revolutionary intellectuals, into political insurrection. Crowds shouted, “Down with the tsar!” Troops within the city refused to fire on the insurgents; mutiny and insubordination spread from unit to unit. Within a few days a Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, on the model of 1905, had been organized in Petrograd.

Middle-class leaders, with the government now helpless, demanded dismissal of the ministry and formation of a new one commanding the confidence of a majority of the Duma. The tsar retaliated by disbanding the Duma. The Duma set up an executive committee to take charge until the situation clarified. There were now two new authorities in the city; one, the Duma committee, essentially moderate, constitutionalist, and relatively legal; the other, the Petrograd Soviet, representing revolutionary forces arising by spontaneous upsurge from below. The Petrograd Soviet (or workers’ “council”) was to play in 1917 a role like that of the Paris Commune of 1792, constantly pushing the supposedly higher and more nationwide authority to the left. The Soviet became the public auditorium and administrative center of the working-class upheaval. Since it was generally socialist in its outlook, all the factions of doctrinaire socialists—Social Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, Bolsheviks—tried to win it over and utilize it for their own ends.

The Duma committee, under pressure from the Petrograd Soviet, on March 14 set up a Provisional Government under Prince Lvov. The Duma liberals, as a concession to the Soviet, admitted one socialist to the new government, Alexander Kerensky, a moderate, legal-minded Social Revolutionary; and they furthermore consented to demand the abdication of Nicholas II. The tsar was then at the front. He tried to return to his palace near Petrograd, but the imperial train was stopped and turned back by troops. The army, fatefully, was taking the side of the revolution. The very generals in the field, unable to vouch for the loyalty of their men, advised abdication. Nicholas yielded; his brother, the grand duke, declined to succeed him; and on March 17,1917, Russia became a republic.

The Bolshevik Revolution: November 1917

The Provisional Government, following the best precedents of European revolutions, called for elections by universal male suffrage to a Constituent Assembly, which was to meet late in the year and prepare a constitution for the new regime. It tried also to continue the war against Germany. In July an offensive was mounted, but the demoralized Russian armies were quickly routed. Pending final decision by the Constituent Assembly, the Provisional Government promised wholesale redistribution of land to the peasants but took no action. Meanwhile, the peasants, driven by the old land hunger, were already overrunning the rural districts, burning and looting. At the front the armies melted away; many high officers refused to serve the republic, and masses of peasant soldiers simply turned their backs and went home, unwilling to be absent while land was being handed out. The Petrograd Soviet, opposing the Provisional Government, called for speedy termination of the war. Fearing reactionary officers, it issued on March 14 its Order No. 1, entrusting command within the army to committees elected by both officers and soldiers. Discipline collapsed.

The revolution was thus already well advanced when Lenin and the other Bolsheviks arrived in Fetrograd in the middle of April. They immediately took sides with the Petrograd Soviet against the Provisional Government, and with similar soviets that had sprung up in other parts of the country. In July an armed uprising of soldiers and sailors, which the Bolshevik central committee disapproved of as premature, was put down. The Bolsheviks were blamed, and Lenin had to flee to Finland. But as a bid for popular support the Provisional Government named the socialist Alexander Kerensky as its head in place of Prince Lvov in an uneasy coalition of moderate socialists and liberals. Kerensky’s middle position was next threatened from the Right. The newly appointed military commander, General Kornilov, dispatched a force of cavalry to restore order. Not only conservatives but liberals wished him success in the hope that he would suppress the soviets. Kornilov’s movement was defeated, but with the aid of the Bolsheviks, who rallied with other socialists, and of revolutionary-minded soldiers in the city who offered armed resistance. Radicals denounced liberals as accomplices in Kornilov’s attempt at counterrevolution, and both camps blamed Kerensky for having allowed the plot to be hatched under his government. Both liberals and moderate socialists abandoned Kerensky, and he had to form a government of uncertain political support. Meanwhile the food shortage worsened with transport disarranged and the farm population in turmoil, so that workers in the city listened more willingly to the most extreme speakers.

The Bolsheviks adapted their program to what the most aroused elements in a revolutionary people seemed to want. Lenin concentrated on four points: first, immediate peace with the Central Powers; second, redistribution of land to the peasants; third, transfer of factories, mines, and other industrial plants from the capitalists to committees of workers in each plant; and, fourth, recognition of the soviets as the supreme power instead of the Provisional Government. Lenin, though a rigid dogmatist on abstract questions, was a flexible and bold tactician, and his program in 1917 was dictated more by the immediate situation in Russia than by considerations of theoretical Marxism. What was needed was to win over soldiers, peasants, and workers by promising them “peace, land, and bread.” With this program, and by infiltration and parliamentary stratagems, as well as by their accuracy as political prophets—predicting the Kornilov counterrevolution and “unmasking” the trend of middle-way liberals to support it—the Bolsheviks won a majority in the Petrograd Soviet and in soviets all over the country.

Lenin thereupon raised the cry, “All power to the Soviets!” to crush Kerensky and forestall the coming Constituent Assembly. Kerensky, to broaden the base on which he stood, and unable to wait for the Constituent Assembly, convoked a kind of pre-parliament representing all parties, labor unions, and zemstvos. Lenin and the Bolsheviks boycotted his pre-parliament. Instead they called an all-Russian Congress of Soviets.

Lenin now judged that the hour had come for the seizure of power. The Bolsheviks themselves were divided, but Lenin was backed by Trotsky, Stalin, and a majority of the party Central Committee. Troops garrisoned in Petrograd voted to support the soviets, which the Bolsheviks now controlled. On the night of November 6-7, 1917, the Bolsheviks took over telephone exchanges, railway stations, and electric power plants in the city. A warship turned its guns on the Winter Palace, where Kerensky’s government sat. The latter could find almost no one to defend it. The hastily assembled Congress of Soviets pronounced the Provisional Government defunct and named in its place a Council of People’s Commissars, of which Lenin became the head. Trotsky was named commissar for foreign affairs; Stalin, commissar for nationalities. Kerensky fled, eventually arriving in the United States, where he died in 1970.

At the Congress of Soviets Lenin introduced two resolutions. One called upon the belligerent governments to negotiate a “just democratic peace,” without annexations and without indemnities; the second “abolished all landlord property” immediately and without compensation.

Although determined to establish a proletarian dictatorship, the Bolsheviks knew the importance of the Russian peasants. The millions of acres belonging to the large estates that were now expropriated provided a base of support for the new regime without which it could hardly have survived.

Thus was accomplished the Bolshevik or November Revolution.[1] But the long awaited Constituent Assembly remained to be dealt with. It met in January 1918. Thirty-six million persons had voted for it. Of these, 9 million had voted for Bolshevik deputies, showing that the Bolshevik program, launched less than a year before by a small band of émigrés, had a widespread mass appeal. But almost 21 million had voted for Kerensky’s party, the agrarian, populist, peasant-oriented Social Revolutionaries. However, said Lenin, “to hand over power to the Constituent Assembly would again be compromising with the malignant bourgeoisie.” The Assembly was broken up on the second day of its sessions; armed sailors dispatched by the people’s commissars simply surrounded it. The dissolution of the Constituent Assembly was a frank repudiation of majority rule in favor of “class rule”—to be exercised for the proletariat by the Bolsheviks. The dictatorship of the proletariat was now established. Two months later, in March 1918, the Bolsheviks renamed themselves the Communist party.

[1] Also known as the October Revolution, since according to the Julian calendar used in Russia until 1918, the events described took place in October.

The New Regime: The Civil War, 1918—1922

In these same months, the Communists, or Bolsheviks, signed the peace of Brest-Litovsk with Germany, surrendering to Germany control over the Baltic provinces, Poland, and the Ukraine. The Russian conquests of two centuries were thus abandoned, but to Lenin it made no difference. He was convinced that the events that he had just mastered in Russia were the prelude to a general upheaval; that the war, still raging in the West, would bring all Europe to the inevitable proletarian or Marxist revolution; that Imperial Germany was therefore doomed; and that Poles, Ukrainians, and others would soon emerge, like the Germans themselves, as free socialist peoples. In any case, it was largely by promising peace that Lenin had won enough backing to overthrow Kerensky, who on this deep popular demand had delayed too long, waiting for England and France to release Russia from its treaty obligations as an ally. But real peace did not come, for the country sank immediately into civil war.

Not only old tsarist reactionaries, and not only liberals, bourgeois, zemstvo members, and Constitutional Democrats, but all types of anti-Leninist socialists as well, Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries, scattered in all directions to organize resistance against the regime of soviets and people’s commissars; and they obtained aid from the Western Allies. Both sides competed for the support of the peasants.

As for the new regime, the oldest of its institutions was the party, founded as a wing of the Social Democrats in 1903; the next oldest were the soviets, dating from 1905 and 1917; and then came the Council of People’s Commissars set up on the day of the coup d’état. The first institution founded under the new order was a political police, an Extraordinary All-Russian Commission of Struggle Against Counterrevolution, Speculation, and Sabotage, commonly known from its Russian initials as the Cheka and in later years, without basic change of methods or purpose, under such successive names as the OGPU, the NKVD, the MVD, and the KGB. It was established on December 7,1917. In January 1918 the Red Army was founded, with Leon Trotsky as war commissar and virtually its creator. In July a constitution was promulgated.

In social policy the Bolsheviks at first adopted no long-range plans, contenting themselves with a mixture of principle and expediency known as “war communism.” They nationalized some of the largest industrial enterprises but left the bulk under the control of workers’ committees. The pressing problem was to find food, which had ceased to move through any normal channels. The peasants, very much as in the French Revolution under similar conditions—worthless money, insecure property titles, unruly hired hands, armed marauding, and a doubtful future—were producing less food than usual, consuming it themselves, or hoarding it on their own farms. The response of the government and city workers was also much as in 1793. The new government levied requisitions, required the peasants to make stated “deliveries,” and invited labor unions to send armed detachments into the country to procure food by force. Since it was naturally the big farmers who had the surplus, they came into disrepute as starvers of the people. Class war broke out, rabid, ferocious, and elemental, between farmers who feared that their very subsistence as well as their property would be taken away and city people, often supported by hungry agricultural laborers, who were driven to desperation by famine. Many peasants, especially the larger farmers, therefore rallied to anti-Bolshevik political leaders.

Centers of resistance developed on every side. In the Don valley a small force assembled under Generals Kornilov and Denikin, with many army officers, gentry landowners, and expropriated business people taking part in it. The Social Revolutionaries gathered followers on the middle Volga. Their most significant military support came from a force of some 45,000 Czechs, who had deserted or been captured from the Austro-Hungarian armies and had then been organized as a Czech Legion to fight on the side of Russia and the Allies. After the November Revolution and the peace of Brest-Litovsk, these Czechs decided to leave Russia by way of the Trans-Siberian Railroad, return to Europe by sea, and resume fighting on the western front. When Bolshevik officials undertook to disarm them, they allied with the Social Revolutionaries on the Volga.

The Allied governments believed that Bolshevism was a temporary madness that with little effort could be stopped. They wished above all to bring Russia back into the war against Germany, an objective they sought to achieve by launching a military intervention in East Asia, through Vladivostok. The Japanese, who had declined military aid to their allies in any other theater, viewed this action favorably, seeing in the ruin of the Russian empire a rare opportunity to develop their sphere of influence in East Asia. It was agreed that an interallied military force should land at Vladivostok, cross Siberia, join with the Czechs, break up Bolshevism, and fall upon the Germans in eastern Europe. For this ambitious scheme Britain and France could supply no soldiers, engaged as they were on the western front. The force turned out to be American and Japanese, but predominantly Japanese; Japan contributed 72,000 men and the United States only 8,000. They landed at Vladivostok in August 1918.

The civil war lasted until 1920, or even later in some places. It became a confused melee in which the Bolsheviks struggled against Russian opponents, independence-minded nationalities, and foreign intervention. The Red Army fought in Ukraine first against the Germans and then against the French, who occupied Odessa as soon as the war ended in Europe. It reconquered Ukraine, Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan, all of which had declared their independence in 1918; put to flight a hundred thousand “Whites,” as the counterrevolutionaries were called, in the south; and fought off Admiral Kolchak, who in Siberia proclaimed himself ruler of all Russia. In 1920, the Bolsheviks carried on a war with the new republic of Poland, which was scarcely organized when it set out to recover the huge Ukrainian and Byelorussian territories that had been Polish before 1772. A small force of British, French, and American troops occupied the northern Russian city of Archangel until the end of 1919, and the Japanese remained at Vladivostok until the end of 1922.

But the anti-Bolshevik forces could never unite. The anti-Communist Russians represented every hue of the political spectrum from unregenerate tsarists to left-wing Social Revolutionaries. Many of the rightist anti-Bolsheviks openly antagonized the peasants by proceeding to restore expropriated landed estates in areas they occupied; many engaged in vindictive reprisals in a kind of “white terror.” Leon Trotsky, on the other hand, shaped in the civil wars a disciplined, effective Red Army, recruiting it, organizing it, unifying it, and equipping it as best he could, assigning political commissars to watch it, and assuring that trustworthy officers occupied its high command. The Bolsheviks could denounce the foreign intervention and appeal to national patriotism, and they could win peasant support by the distribution of land.

By 1922 the Bolsheviks, or Communists, had established themselves up to the frontiers of the former tsarist empire in every direction except on the European side. There the band of Baltic states—Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—remained independent; Romania had acquired Bessarabia, the new Romanian frontier reaching now almost to Odessa. Poland, as a result of the war of 1920, retained a frontier farther east than the Allies themselves had intended. Russia thus lost thousands of square miles of territory and buffer areas acquired over the centuries by the tsars. They remained lost until the Second World War. But peace was won and the regime stood.

It was during these civil wars that the Red Terror broke out in Russia. Like the famous Terror in France in 1793, it was in part a response to civil and foreign war. Before the Bolshevik Terror, however, the old Jacobin Terror paled. Thousands were shot in Russia merely as hostages (a practice unknown to Europe for some time); and other thousands were killed without even the summary formalities of revolutionary tribunals. The Cheka was the most formidable political police that had yet appeared. The Bolshevik Terror was aimed at the physical extermination of all who opposed the new regime. A bourgeois class background would go far to confirm the guilt of the person charged with conspiring against the Soviet state. As a chief of the Cheka said: “The first questions you should put to the accused person are, To what class does he belong, what is his origin, what was his education, and what is his profession? These should determine the fate of the accused. This is the essence of the Red Terror.”

But a working-class background for a man or a woman made little difference. In 1918 a young woman named Fanny Kaplan shot at Lenin and wounded him. She deposed that she had favored the Constituent Assembly, that her parents had emigrated to America in 1911, that she had six working-class brothers and sisters; and she admitted that she had intended to kill Lenin. She was of course executed, as were others in Petrograd. When the sailors at Kronstadt, who were among the first adherents of the Bolsheviks, rose in 1921, objecting to domination of the soviets by the party (threatening a kind of leftist renewal of the revolution, like the Hébertists who had opposed Robespierre), they were branded as petty bourgeois and shot down by the thousands. The Terror struck at the revolutionists themselves quite as much as it did the bourgeoisie; it was to continue to do so long after the revolution was secure.

The Terror succeeded in its purpose. Together with the victories of the Red Army, it established the new regime. Those “bourgeois” who survived took on the protective coloration of “toilers.” No bourgeois as such presumed to take part in the politics of Russia. Mensheviks and other socialists fleeing to Europe told appalling stories of the human toll taken by Lenin. Horrified European socialists repudiated communism as an atrocious, Russian perversion of Marxism. But, at whatever cost, Lenin and his followers were now able to start building the socialist society as they understood it.

93. THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

Government. The Nationalities and Federalism

With the end of the civil wars and foreign intervention, and with the termination of the war with Poland, it became possible in 1922 to establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. There were at first four such republics in the Union, but political reorganization and the occupation of new territories at the beginning of the Second World War increased the number to 15 (see map, pp. 746-747). Although many of these new republics were established in central Asia, most of the Soviet Union’s population lived in three large Slavic regions: the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic. In the new Union, which geographically replaced the old Russian empire, the name Russia was not officially used. The guiding conception was a blend of the national and the international: to recognize nationality by granting autonomy to national groups, while holding these groups together in a higher union and allowing new groups to enter regardless of historic frontiers. In 1922 the expectation of world revolution was still alive. The constitution, formally adopted in 1924, pronounced the founding of the U.S.S.R. to be “a decisive step by way of uniting the workers of all countries into one World Soviet Socialist Republic.” It made the Union, in principle, fluid and expansible, declared that any member republic might secede and that newly formed soviet socialist republics might join (none ever did voluntarily). When the U.S.S.R. occupied contiguous territories (once part of the tsarist empire) after the outbreak of the Second World War, these territories were also transformed into Soviet Socialist republics—the three independent Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania; Bessarabia, detached from Romania; and Karelia, taken from Finland after the Russo-Finnish War. Bessarabia became the Moldavian S.S.R., and Karelia temporarily, from 1940 to 1956, had the status of a Karelo-Finnish S.S.R., a 16th Soviet Socialist republic.

The federal principle in the U.S.S.R. was designed to resolve the problem of nationalism. The tsardom, in its last decades, had tried to deal with this problem by systematic Russification. The nationalities had resisted, and nationalist discontent had been one of the forces fatally weakening the empire. Nationalism, the demand that national groups should have their own political sovereignty, had not only broken up the Austro-Hungarian empire but “Balkanized” central and eastern Europe. This might have happened after 1917 in Russia except for the fact that the Red Army during the civil wars occupied large parts of the tsarist empire which had broken away and declared their independence. As it turned out, by 1922 the U.S.S.R. occupied a sixth of the world’s land area.

A hundred languages were spoken in the Soviet Union, and 50 distinct nationalities were recognized within its borders. Many of these were small splinter groups or isolated communities left by the ebb and flow of humanity in inner Asia over thousands of years. All recognized nationalities received a cultural autonomy, or the right to use their own language, have their own schools, wear their own dress, and follow their own folkways without interference. Indeed, the Soviet authorities favored the growth of cultural nationalism, and some 50 local languages were put into written form for the first time.

Administratively the nationalities were put on various levels, with varying degrees of separate identity according to their size and importance.

The most important were the soviet republics themselves, but in practice the Russian S.F.S.R., with over half the population and three-fourths of the territory of the Union, predominated over all the others. When to the Russian were added the Ukrainian and the Byelorussian republics, the overwhelmingly Russian and Slavic character of the Union was marked. Moreover all political and economic rights were severely limited by the concentration of authority in the hands of the central government. There was little substance in the formal claim that each constituent republic was sovereign and had the right to conduct its own foreign affairs. During the Second World War there was evidence that separatism had not wholly died down, remaining especially alive in Ukraine, and several autonomous areas were officially dissolved for separatist activities or even for collusion with the German invaders. By the late 1980s it became increasingly apparent that the Soviets could not prevent the disintegration of the multinational empire that they had inherited from the tsars.

Government: State and Party

Government in the Union, and in each component republic, followed a pattern worked out during the revolution and written into the constitutions of 1924 and 1936. In theory, a principle of parallelism was adopted. On the one hand was the state: on the other, paralleling the state but technically not part of it, was the party. But the close interlocking relationship between the two made the parallelism virtually meaningless because the party actually controlled all of the state institutions.

The distinctive state institution was the council or soviet. Here elections took place, and authority proceeded from the bottom upward to the top through an ascending hierarchy of local, provincial, and national Soviets. Under the constitution of 1924 only “toilers” had the right to vote. In the later constitution of 1936 a more direct democratic procedure was introduced. Voters henceforth directly elected members of the higher soviets, a secret ballot was adopted, no class was any longer denied the vote, and a bicameral parliament was created. On the state side, as set forth in the constitution of 1936, the government embodied many seemingly democratic features.

Yet alongside the state, at all levels and in all localities, was the party. Only one party was allowed, the Communist, though nonparty members might be elected to the soviets or to other official positions. In the party, authority began at the top and proceeded downward. At its apex stood the Central Committee, whose membership varied from about 70 in the 1930s to more than double that in later years. Within the Central Committee a powerful Politburo, or political bureau, of about a dozen members dominated discussions of policy and personnel. An even more powerful general secretary, the office that Stalin virtually fashioned, dominated the entire structure and apparatus with authority over appointments, assignments, and decisions at all levels. Thus power and authority in the Communist Party flowed downward and outward, as in an army, or as in a highly centralized government agency or large private corporation in the West, except that the party was not subject to any outside control. Discipline was likewise enforced in ways not used in liberal countries, the fearsome machinery of the secret police being available for use against party members as well as those outside.

The number of party members, men and women, which could not have been more than 70,000 at the time of the revolution, rose to about 2 million by 1930, 3 million by 1940, and to 19 million in the late 1980s. The Leninist ideal of a highly disciplined party, made up of faithful and zealous workers who willingly carried out orders, the ideal on which the Bolsheviks had separated from the Mensheviks in 1903, continued to characterize the Communist party in the Soviet Union. A party of 2 million members, though small in contrast to the population of the U.S.S.R., still represented an enormous growth for the party itself; for each old member who had joined before 1917 there were thousands of new ones. To preserve party unity under the new conditions strict uniformity was enforced. Members intensively studied the principles of Marxism-Leninism, embraced dialectical materialism as a philosophy and even as a kind of religion, learned to take orders without question or compunction and to give authoritative leadership to the mass of nonparty members among whom they worked. The base of the party structure consisted of small nuclei or cells. In each factory, in each mine, in each office, in each class at the universities and technical schools, in each labor union, in each at least of the larger villages, a few people belonged to the party and imparted party views and party momentum to the whole.

The function of the party, in Marxist terms, was to carry out the dictatorship of the proletariat. It was to lead the people as a whole to the realization of socialism and, in day-to-day affairs, to coordinate the ponderous mechanism of government and make it work. Party members were present at all levels of the government. Throughout the whole structure, the party decided what the state should do.

The party in the U.S.S.R. by the 1930s functioned as a tightly knit, highly disciplined leadership group. Those who joined it were willing to work hard, devote themselves to party matters day and night, absorb and communicate the party policy (or “party line”), go where they were sent, attend meetings, speak up, perceive and explain the significance of passing events for the Soviet Union or the world revolution, and master intricate technical details of farming, manufacturing, or the care of machinery. The party was a specially trained elite whose members were in constant touch with each other. It was the thin stream of lifeblood which, by circulating through all the diverse tissues of the U.S.S.R., kept the whole complex body unified, functioning, and alive.

If the party was a leadership group, the corollary was that more than 95 out of 100 persons were condemned to be followers, and while it is perhaps true (as apologists for the system maintained) that under any system true leadership is exercised by a tiny fraction of people, the difference between Communist and non-Communist in the U.S.S.R. became a clear matter of social status. As the years passed, many Communists in the U.S.S.R. were less the revolutionary firebrand type than the successful and efficient man or woman in any social system. They represented the satisfied, not the dissatisfied. They enjoyed extensive material privileges, not only for themselves but also for their children. They became a new vested interest. Within the party, members had to be not so much leaders as followers. A homogeneous and monolithic organization had to present a solid front to the far more numerous outsiders. From time to time a good deal of difference of opinion and open discussion was tolerated (since there was only one party all political questions were intraparty disputes), but in the end the entire membership had to conform. The party favored a certain fertility of mind in looking for ways to get tasks accomplished, but it did not favor, and in fact repressed, originality, boldness, risk-taking, or freedom of thought or action. The dangers of stagnation in such a system became apparent within the Soviet Union itself in later times.

The New Economic Policy, 1921-1927

By 1920 “war communism” had hopelessly antagonized the peasants, who were cultivating less than two-thirds as much land as in 1914. This fact, together with a severe drought and the breakdown of transportation, produced a great famine. Millions of people died. The ravages of eight years—of the First World War, the revolution, the civil wars, the Terror, the famine—had left the country in ruins, its productive facilities thrown back by decades as compared with 1914. The mutiny of the Kronstadt sailors in 1921 revealed profound disillusionment in the revolutionary ranks themselves. Lenin concluded that socialization had advanced too fast. He openly advocated a compromise with capitalism, a strategic retreat. The New Economic Policy, or NEP, adopted in 1921, lasted until 1927. Most of the decade of the 1920s saw a relaxation of tempo (and of terror) for most people in the U.S.S.R.

Under the NEP, while the state controlled the “commanding heights” of the economy, maintaining state ownership of the basic productive industries, it allowed a great deal of private trading for private profit. The basic problem was to restore trade between town and country. The peasants would produce only for their own subsistence unless they could exchange a surplus for city-made wares such as clothing or tools. The city people had to be fed from the country if they were to turn out factory products or even continue to live in the city. Under the NEP, peasants were allowed to sell their farm products freely. Middlemen were allowed to buy and sell farm products and manufactured articles at will, selling to whom they pleased at market prices and at a profit to themselves. The NEP thus fostered a new commercial class in the cities and favored the big individualist farmer or kulak in the countryside. Indeed, rural changes initiated before 1914 were still at work; peasant families consolidated millions of acres as private property in 1922, 1923, and 1924. Correspondingly, other peasants became “proletarians,” wage-earning hired hands. Under the NEP the worst damages of war and revolution were repaired. But there was no real progress, for in 1928 Russia was producing only about as much grain, raw cotton, cattle, coal, and oil as in 1913, and far less than it presumably would have produced (given the rate of growth before 1913) had there been no revolution.

Social and Cultural Changes after the Revolution

Most Bolsheviks wanted their revolution to accomplish much more than the reconstruction of the state and economy; they wanted to revolutionize the daily lives of the workers, peasants, and “toilers,” whom they now expected to construct a new classless society. The new Soviet society was supposed to destroy traditional gender hierarchies as well as the hierarchies of class and wealth. Under the legal reforms of the revolutionary regime, women received equal voting rights, the right to divorce, and access to birth control and abortion—which was legalized in 1920. The new theoretical rights, however, did not have much immediate effect on the social or economic lives of most women in the Soviet Union. Some of the new rights soon lost significance (for example, the right to vote) or disappeared (for example, abortion became illegal again in the 1930s and 1940s), and traditional social relations among the rural masses could not simply be transformed by revolutionary decrees. But it is also true that many girls and young women, like the boys and young men from the working classes, began to receive more education, especially after the turmoil of the Civil War subsided in the early 1920s.

The campaign to improve prerevolutionary literacy rates was only one example of the early Bolshevik aspirations for radical cultural changes. Writers and artists rallied to the revolutionary cause, seeing the social upheaval as part of a wider rejection of traditional ideas and artistic forms. The creative film director, Sergei Eisenstein, joined with avant-garde theatrical groups to create imaginative new techniques for editing films, portraying dramatic action, and representing political themes. Using his new techniques, Eisenstein produced a famous film about the Russian Revolution of 1905, Potemkin (1925), which was commissioned by the Soviet government and which is still regarded by many critics as one of the most innovative films in the history of cinema. Meanwhile, some radical artists sought to combine “futurist” art with the socialist revolution, and the young Russian poet Vladimir Mayakovsky moved on from a famous “Ode to Revolution” to innovative experiments with a new poetic language. In the end, though, Mayakovsky fell into despair and committed suicide as Soviet society entered the Stalinist era of rigid social control. By the late 1920s the period of experimental art was over, and the new cultural orthodoxy of “socialist realism” was celebrating the beauty of large factories and tractors rather than the abstract mysteries of the artistic avant-garde. Like all other spheres of Soviet life, art fell under the strict control of the Communist party and government institutions.

Stalin and Trotsky

Lenin died in 1924 prematurely at the age of 54 after a series of paralyzing strokes that left him incapacitated in the last two years of his life. His embalmed remains were put permanently on view in the Kremlin; Petrograd was renamed Leningrad; a leader cult was built up around his name and image. The party presented him as a deified equal of Marx himself, and it became necessary for all schools of communist thought to claim unflinching fidelity to the Leninist tradition. Actually, in his own lifetime, the Old Bolsheviks had never regarded Lenin as infallible. They had often differed with him and with each other. As he lay dying, and after his death, his old companions and contemporaries, carrying on the feuding habits of the émigré days, fought with each other for control of the party in Lenin’s name. They disputed over Lenin’s intentions, but behind the scenes, the general secretary of the party, Joseph Stalin, whom Lenin had warned against, was drawing all the strings of party control into his own hands. More openly and vociferously, Leon Trotsky, who as war commissar in the critical years had been only less conspicuous than Lenin himself, raised the basic issues of the whole nature and future of the movement.

Trotsky, in 1925 and 1926, inveighed against the lassitude that had descended upon socialism.[2] The NEP with its tolerance of bourgeois and kulaks excited his contempt. He developed his doctrine of “permanent revolution,” an incessant drive for proletarian objectives on all fronts in all parts of the world. He championed world revolution, which many in the party were beginning to discard in favor of first building socialism in one country. He denounced the tendency to bureaucratic ossification in the party and urged a new movement of the masses to give it life. He called for more forceful development of industry and for the collectivization of agriculture, which had figured in Communist manifestos ever since 1848. Above all, he demanded immediate adoption of an overall plan, a central control and operation of the whole economic life of the country.

Trotsky failed to carry the party with him. He was charged with leftist deviationism, machinations against the Central Committee, and inciting public discussion of controversial issues outside the party. Stalin wove his web. At a party congress in 1927,95 percent of the delegates dutifully voted for Stalin and the Central Committee and fewer than 5 percent voted for Trotsky. Trotsky was first exiled to Siberia, then banished from the U.S.S.R.; he lived in Europe and then in Mexico, writing and propagandizing for the “permanent revolution,” stigmatizing developments in the U.S.S.R. as a monstrous betrayal of Marxism-Leninism, and organizing an underground against Stalin as he had done in former days against the tsar. He was murdered in Mexico in 1940 under mysterious circumstances, presumably by a Soviet agent. Not until the late 1980s was anyone in the U.S.S.R. permitted to talk or write about him and his contributions to the revolution.

[2] For communists, though not for socialists, the terms “communism” and “socialism” were almost interchangeable, since Russian Communists regarded their own system as true socialism and all other socialism as opportunistic, reactionary, or false. Communism was also defined, in the U.S.S.R., as a future state of society toward which socialism, that is, Soviet socialism, was the intermediate stage.

94. STALIN: THE FIVE-YEAR PLANS AND THE PURGES

Economic Planning

Hardly had Trotsky been expelled when Stalin and the party appropriated certain fragments of his program. In 1928 the party launched the First Five-Year Plan, aimed at rapid industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture. “Planning,” or the central planning of a country’s whole economic life by government officials, was to become the distinctive feature of Soviet economics and the one that for a time was to have the greatest influence on other parts of the world.

In retrospect, it seems strange that the Communists waited ten years before adopting a plan. The truth seems to be that the Bolsheviks had only vague ideas of what to do after their seizure of power. Marxism for the most part gave only general descriptions of a future classless society, which offered no specific guidance for the operation of a modern industrial system. The main constructive idea had been mapped out, most clearly by Engels. Within each private enterprise, Engels had observed, harmony and order reigned; it was only between private enterprises that capitalism was chaotic. In the individual factory, he noted, the various departments did not compete with each other; the output of all departments was planned and coordinated by management. In an approximate way, the great capitalist mergers and trusts, controlling many factories, prevented competition between them, assigned specific quotas to each, anticipated, coordinated, and stabilized the work of each plant and each person by an overall policy. With the growth of large corporate enterprise, observed Engels, the area of economic life under free competition was constantly reduced, and the area brought under rational planning was constantly enlarged. The obvious next step, according to Engels and other socialists, was to treat all the economic life of a country as a single factory with many departments, a single enormous monopoly with many members under one unified, far-seeing management.

During the First World War the governments of belligerent countries had in fact adopted such centralized controls, not because they were socialist but because in time of war people were willing to subordinate their usual liberties to a single undisputed social purpose—victory. The “planned society” therefore made its first actual (though incomplete) appearance in the First World War. It was partly from socialist doctrine as exemplified by Engels, partly from experience of the war, and in even larger measure from the pressure to meet the continuing chronic problems of the country by raising its productive level that Stalin and the party in Russia developed the idea of an economic plan.

The U.S.S.R. decided to plan for five years into the future, beginning with the First Five-Year Plan in 1928. The aim of the plan was to strengthen and enrich the country, make it militarily and industrially self-sufficient, lay the groundwork for a true workers’ society, and overcome the Russian reputation for backwardness. As Stalin said in a speech in 1929: “We are becoming a country of metal, a country of automobiles, a country of tractors. And when we have put the U.S.S.R. in a motor car and the muzhik in a tractor.... we shall see which countries may then be ‘classified’ as backward and which as advanced.” The Plan was declared fulfilled in 1932, and a Second Five-Year Plan was launched, lasting until 1937. The Third, inaugurated in 1938, was interrupted by the war with Germany in 1941. New plans were introduced after 1945.

The First Five-Year Plan (like its successors) listed the economic goals to be achieved. It was administered by an agency called the Gosplan. Within the frame of general policy set by the party, the Gosplan determined how much of every article the country should produce, what wages all classes of workers should receive, and at what prices all goods should be exchanged. Because all decisions were made at the top, it was as much a command economy as a planned economy. At the bottom level, in the individual factory, the local management drew up its requirements, or estimates of what it would need, in raw material, machinery, trained workers, plant facilities, and fuel, if it was to deliver the planned quantity of its product at a stated date. Thousands of estimates were passed up the planning ladder until they reached the Gosplan, which, balancing them against each other and against other needs as seen at the top, determined what should be produced and in what qualities and grades; how many workers should be trained in technical schools and in what particular skills; how many machines should be manufactured and how many spare parts; and how, where, when, and to whom the workers and manufactured goods should be made available. The plan, in short, undertook to control, by conscious management, the flow of resources and workforce which was regulated in capitalist economies by shifts in demand and supply and through changes in prices, wage levels, profits, and interest rates.

The system was exceedingly intricate. It was not easy to have the right number of ball bearings, for example, arrive at the right place at the right time, in exact correspondence to the amounts of other materials or to the number of workers waiting to use them. Sometimes there was overproduction; sometimes, underproduction. Countless reports, checkups, and exchanges of information were necessary. A huge class of bureaucrats came into existence to handle the paperwork. The plan achieved some of its goals, exceeded a few, and failed in some. The criteria for fulfillment were almost always quantitative, often to the complete neglect of quality control.

The primary objective of the First Five-Year Plan was to build up the heavy industry, or capital wealth, of the U.S.S.R. The aim was to industrialize without the use of foreign loans.[3] Russia in 1928 was still chiefly an agricultural country. The world offered hardly any case of a country shifting from agriculture to industry without borrowing capital from abroad.

Britain, the original home of the Industrial Revolution, was the best example, although even there in the eighteenth century a great deal of capital invested in England was owned by the Dutch. An agricultural country could industrialize from its own resources only by drawing upon agriculture itself. An agricultural revolution had been prerequisite to an industrial revolution in England. By enclosure of land, the squeezing out of small independent farmers, the introduction of scientific cultivation, and under the auspices of a growing class of wealthy landowners, England had both increased its production of food and released many of the rural population to find employment in industry. The First Five-Year Plan called for a similar agricultural revolution in Russia, without benefit to landlords and under the auspices of the state, but no one forsaw its consequences.

[3] The Bolsheviks had repudiated the entire debt of the tsarist empire. Their credit in capitalist countries was therefore not good, so that, in addition to fearing dependence upon foreign lenders, they were in any case for a long time unable to borrow large sums.

The Collectivization of Agriculture

The agricultural plan of 1929 set up collective farms, averaging a few thousand acres apiece, which were considered to be the property not of the state but of the peasants collectively who resided on them. (A few state-operated collective farms were also established, as models for the others.) Individual peasants were to pool their privately owned fields and livestock in these collectives. When those peasants who possessed fields or stock in considerable amount—the prosperous peasants or kulaks—resisted surrendering them to the new collectives, they were ruthlessly liquidated as a class. Zealous detachments of Communists from the cities used violence; poor peasants turned upon rich ones; hundreds of thousands of kulaks and their families were killed and many more were transported to labor camps in remote parts of the Soviet Union. The trend that had gone on since the nineteenth-century Emancipation, building up a class of property-owning, labor-hiring, and “bourgeois” peasants, was now abruptly reversed. Collectivization was intended to convert the peasantry into a class more nearly resembling the proletariat of Marxian doctrine, a class of people who as individuals owned no capital and employed no labor, and so would better fit into a proletarian, socialist state. The year 1929, not 1917, was the memorable revolutionary year for most people in Russia.

Collectivization was accomplished at the cost of village class war in which many of the most capable farmers perished and at the cost also of a wholesale destruction of livestock. The big farmers slaughtered their horses, cattle, pigs, and poultry rather than give them up. Even middling and small farmers did the same, caring nothing about animals that were no longer their own. The ruinous loss of animals was the worst unforeseen calamity of the First Five-Year Plan. The agricultural disorders led to a deadly famine in southeast Russia and the Ukraine in 1932 that cost millions of lives. Despite the famine Stalin refused to cut back on cereal and other food exports because they were needed to pay for industrial imports under the Five-Year Plan.

By introducing thousand-acre units in place of small ones, collectivization made it possible to apply capital to the soil. Formerly the average peasant had been far too poor to buy a tractor and his fields had been too tiny and dispersed for him to use one; only a few kulaks had employed any such machinery. In the course of the First Five-Year Plan hundreds of Machine Tractor Stations were organized throughout the country. In its region each maintained a force of tractors, harvesting combines, and expert agronomists, which could be dispatched from one collective farm to another by local arrangement. The new collectivized system made it easier for higher authorities to control the agricultural surplus (products not consumed by the village itself). Each collective was assigned a quota. Members of the collective could sell in a free market any products they raised beyond this quota. Meanwhile the government knew the quantity of agricultural produce it could count on, either to feed the cities and other regions that did not produce their own food or for export in the world market to pay for imports of machinery from the West. By 1939 all but a negligible fraction of the peasantry was collectivized, but collectivization failed to increase agricultural output. The new collectives denied peasants the freedom to make their own economic decisions, destroyed their incentive to improve the land they worked, and prevented them from passing land on to their heirs. Agriculture therefore remained a troubled sector of the economy. Collectivization made possible, however, the success of industrialization by augmenting the supply of industrial workers. Since the villages needed less labor, 20 million people moved from country to city between the years 1926 and 1939 and were available for jobs in the new industries.

The Growth of Industry

While the agricultural base was being revolutionized, industrialization went rapidly forward. At first there was considerable dependence on the capitalist countries. Engineers and other technicians from western Europe and the United States went to work in the Soviet Union. Much machinery was imported. But the worldwide depression that set in about 1931, bringing a catastrophic fall of agricultural prices, made foreign-made machines more costly in terms of the cereals that were the chief Soviet export. The international situation also deteriorated. While the U.S.S.R. always considered the whole outside world hostile to it, both Japan and Germany in the 1930s showed overt hostility and posed a new military threat. The Second Five-Year Plan, launched in 1933, though in some ways less ambitious than the first, showed an even greater determination to cut down imports and achieve national self-sufficiency, especially in the heavy industry basic to war production.

No ten years in the history of any Western country ever showed such a rate of industrial growth as the decade of the first two plans in the Soviet Union. In Great Britain industrialization had been gradual; in Germany and the United States it had been more rapid, and in each country there had been decades in which output of coal or iron doubled; but in the U.S.S.R., from 1928 to 1938, production of iron and steel expanded four times and that of coal expanded three and a half times. In 1938 the U.S.S.R. was the world’s largest producer of farm tractors and railway locomotives. Four-fifths of all its industrial output came from plants built in the preceding ten years. In 1939 the U.S.S.R., as measured by purely quantitative standards, was surpassed in gross industrial output only by the United States and Germany.

The plans called for a marked development of industry east of the Urals and brought a modernization of life for the first time to inner Asia. New industrial cities rose in the old Turkestan (divided into the five Central Asian Soviet socialist republics) and in Siberia. The opening of all these new areas demanded a revolution in transportation, and by 1938 the railroads were carrying five times as much freight as in 1913.

These astounding developments were enough to change the relative economic strength of the world’s peoples with respect to one another. It was significant that inner Asia was for the first time turning industrial. In part because of these developments in Asia, the Russia that went to war with Germany in 1941 proved to be a different antagonist from the Russia of 1914. Industrialization in the Urals and in Asia enabled the U.S.S.R. (with Allied assistance) to survive the German occupation and destruction of the older industrial areas in the Don valley. The new “socialist fatherland” proved able to absorb terrible losses and strike back. A great deal of the increased industrial output had gone to equip and modernize the Red Army.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1894-1937

                   Creation of Russian Marxist organization, the Social Democratic Party
1903               Social Democrats split into two factions, Bolsheviks and Mensheviks; Lenin leads Bolsheviks
January 1905       Economic hardship, “Bloody Sunday,” and Russo-Japanese War spark Revolution of 1905 in St. Petersburg
October 1905       Tsar’s “October Manifesto” establishes new parliamentary body, the Duma 
1906-1911          Stolypin’s reforms promote growth of prosperous farmers (kulaks)
1914               Russia enters war with Germany and suffers crushing military defeats
March 1917         Tsar Nicholas 11 abdicates; Russia becomes a republic under provisional government and continues war with Germany
April 1917         Germany provides safe passage for Bolshevik leaders to enter Russia
November 1917      The Bolshevik Revolution: Lenin and followers overthrow the provisional government in Petrograd
January 1918       Bolsheviks dissolve Constituent Assembly and establish the Red Army
1918-1922          Bolsheviks consolidate power and suppress all opponents in Civil War and “Red Terror”
1919-1920          Creation of Third, or Communist, International (the Comintern)
1921-1927          New Economic Policy allows more independent commercial activity
1922               Establishment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
1925-1927          Stalin prevails over Trotsky to take control of the Bolshevik Central Committee
1928               Stalin launches the first Five-Year Plan for economic development
1929               Soviet regime begins the collectivization of agriculture; resistance from kulaks and others leads to widespread repression and famine
1936-1937          Public “purge trials” remove Old Bolsheviks from Communist party ; many are executed or imprisoned

At the same time, the degree of industrialization of the U.S.S.R. can easily be exaggerated. It was phenomenal because it started from so little. Qualitatively, by Western criteria, standards of production were low. Many of the hastily constructed new plants were shoddy and suffered from rapid depreciation. In efficiency, as shown by output per worker employed, the U.S.S.R. continued to lag behind the West. In intensity of modernization, as shown by output of certain items in proportion to the whole population, it also lagged. Per capita comparisons with other industrial nations, in 1937, show that the U.S.S.R. produced less coal, electricity, cottons, woolens, leather shoes, or soap than did the United States, Britain, Germany, France, or Japan, and less iron and steel than any of them except Japan. Production of paper is revealing because paper is used in so many different aspects of modern education, economic activity, communications, government affairs, and household life. Where the United States about 1937 produced 103 pounds of paper per person, Germany and Great Britain each produced 92, France produced 51, and Japan produced 17, the U.S.S.R. produced only 11.

Social Costs and Social Effects of the Plans

Industrialization in Russia demanded huge and continuing sacrifices on the part of the people. It was not merely that kulaks lost their lives, or that millions of others, whose exact numbers have never been known, were found to be enemies of the system and sent off to correctional labor camps. All were required to accept a program of austerity and self-denial, going without the better food, housing, and other consumer goods that might have been produced, in order that the capital wealth and heavy industry of the country might be built up. The plan required hard work and low wages. Better housing, better food, better clothing, and more leisure would follow once file basic industries had been built. Morale was sustained by propaganda. One of the chief functions of party members was to explain why sacrifices were necessary. In the late 1930s life began to ease; food rationing was abolished in 1935, and a few more products of light industry, such as dishes and fountain pens, began to appear in Soviet retail stores. Living standards were at least up to those of 1927 with prospects brighter for raising them. But the need for war preparations, as the world again approached chaos, again drove back the vision of the Promised Land.

Socialism, as realized in the plans, did away with some of the evils of unrestrained free enterprise. There was no acknowledged unemployment. There was no cycle of boom and depression. There was less misuse of women and children than in the early days of industrialism in the West. There was a minimum below which no one was supposed to fall. On the other hand, there was no economic equality. Marxism, indeed, had never seen complete equality of income as a principal objective. While there were no very rich people, as in the West (where the income of the very rich often came from inherited property), the differences in income were nevertheless great. High government officials, managers, engineers, and favored artists and intellectuals received the highest rewards. People with large incomes could build precarious little fortunes for themselves and their children. They could not, however, under socialism, own any industrial capital, that is, buy shares of stock or other equities. There was, of course, no stock exchange.

Competition of a special kind developed. In 1935 a miner named Stakhanov greatly increased his daily output of coal by devising improvements in his methods of work. He also greatly increased his wages, since Soviet workers were paid at piece rates. His example proved contagious; workers all over the country began to break records of all kinds. The government publicized their achievements, called them Stakhanovites and “labor heroes,” and pronounced the movement to be “a new and higher stage of socialist competition.” In labor circles in the United States such straining to increase output was called a speed-up, and piecework wages had long been anathema to the organized labor of all countries. Nor was management free from competitive pressure. A factory manager who failed to show the net income (or “profit”) upon which the plan counted, or who failed to meet his quota of output, might lose not only his job but also his social status—or even his life.

Solidarity was purchased at the price of totalitarianism. The government supervised everything. There was no room for skepticism, independence of thought, or any criticism that weakened the will to achieve. As in tsarist times, no one could leave the country without special permission, which was given far more rarely than before 1914. There was, of course, only one political party. There were no free labor unions, no free press, no freedom of association, and at best only an irritable tolerance for religion. Soviet Jews who adapted to the system found themselves in a more favorable position than ever before; some even attained positions of high importance. Many still faced lingering suspicion and distrust, however, and in religious matters they met harassment. Art, literature, and even science became vehicles of political propaganda; creative, experimental works— and the people who promoted them—disappeared from Soviet cultural life. Conformity was the ideal, and the very passion for solidarity made for fear and suspicion of all who might go astray. As for the number of people sacrificed to Stalin’s brutal Juggernaut-liquidated bourgeois, liquidated peasants, purged party members, disaffected persons sentenced to long terms in labor camps—a precise figure is difficult to arrive at, but it certainly reached many millions over the years in which the various Soviet plans were implemented.

The Purge Trials of the 1930s

In 1936 socialism was judged to have proved so successful that a new constitution for the U.S.S.R. was proclaimed. It enumerated, as rights of Soviet citizens, not merely the usual civil liberties of Western democracy but the rights to steady employment, rest, leisure, economic security, and a comfortable old age. All forms of racism were condemned. It reorganized the Soviet republics and granted equal and direct universal suffrage. The constitution of 1936 received favorable comment in the West, where it was hoped that the Russian Revolution, like former revolutions, had at last turned into more peaceable and quiet channels. It was nonetheless apparent that the Communist party remained the sole governing group in the country, that Stalin was tightening his dictatorship, and that the party was racked by internal troubles.

It was natural that the rapid changes of the 1930s should provide divergences of opinion among the party leaders, but Stalin acted preemptorily to suppress all dissent. As early as 1933, the party underwent a drastic purge, in which a third of its members were expelled. Even the faithful were appalled at Stalin’s growing ruthlessness. Serge Kirov, an old friend and revolutionary companion of Stalin since 1909, head of the Leningrad party apparatus, and member of the Politburo since 1930, showed signs of leading the disaffected. In 1934 he was assassinated in his office, it is now thought by a police agent of Stalin’s. Stalin used the assassination as an excuse to strike out at his opponents, imagined or real, by a revival of terror, immediately executing over a hundred persons and launching the extraordinary purges of the next four years.

A series of sensational trials took place. In 1936 sixteen Old Bolsheviks were brought to trial. Some, like Zinoviev and Kamenev, had been expelled from the party in 1927 for supporting Trotsky and subsequently, after the proper recantations, had been readmitted. Now they were charged with the murder of Kirov, with plotting the murder of Stalin, and with having organized in 1932 under Trotsky’s inspiration a secret group to disrupt and terrorize the Central Committee. To the amazement of the world, all the accused made full confession to the charges in open court. All blamed themselves as unworthy and erring reprobates. All were put to death. In 1937, after similar trials, 17 other Old Bolsheviks met the same fate or received long prison sentences; and in 1938 a group of “rightists” were executed after drey were charged with wanting to restore bourgeois capitalism. The same confessions and self-accusations followed in almost every case, with no other verifiable evidence adduced. How these confessions were obtained in open court from hardened revolutionaries apparently in full possession of their faculties and bearing no sign of physical harm mystified the outside world. Only later did it become clear that psychological torture had broken the will of those accused and that threats against their families (or promises to spare them) had played the major part.

In addition to these public trials there were other arrests, private inquisitions, and executions. In 1937, in a secret court martial, Marshal Tukhachevski and seven other top generals were accused of Trotskyism and of conspiring with the Germans and Japanese and were summarily shot. The purges embraced the highest levels of the party, government, military, intellectual, and scientific circles and reached down to the lesser echelons as well. In later years the KGB itself disclosed that in the years 1930-1953 (the year of Stalin’s death) 3,778,334 persons had been tried and sentenced for “counterrevolutionary” activity and crimes against the state, most of them in the Great Terror of 1934—1938, and that 786,098 were executed; unknown others died in prison camps, later to be known as the Gulag. In later years, the innocence of many of Stalin’s victims was officially confirmed and their reputations posthumously restored.

By these purges Stalin rid himself of all possible rivals for his own position. He disposed of the embarrassment of having colleagues about him who could remember the old days, who could quote Lenin as a former friend, or belittle the reality of 1937 by recalling the dreams of 1917. After 1938 there were virtually no Old Bolsheviks left. The aging but still explosive professional revolutionaries were now dead. A younger group, products of the new order, practical, constructive, impatient of “agitators,” and acquiescing in Stalin’s dictatorship, were operating what was now an established system.

95. THE INTERNATIONAL IMPACT OF COMMUNISM, 1919-1939

The Background: Socialism and the First World War

Marxism had always been international in its outlook. To Marx and the early Marxists existing states (like other institutions) owed their character to the class struggle. They were no more than committees of the bourgeoisie to govern the proletariat, destined to be dismantled and pass away in the course of inevitable historic processes. After Marx’s death, as Marxist parties grew in numbers, and as states of western Europe became more democratic, most people who called themselves Marxists accepted the national state, seeing in it a means by which the workers’ lot could be gradually improved. This view was part of the movement of revisionism, or what more rigorous Marxists called “opportunism.” In the First World War national loyalty proved its strength. The socialist parties in the Reichstag, the French Chamber, and other parliamentary bodies voted for war credits without hesitation. Socialist workers reported for mobilization like everyone else.

Small minorities of socialists in every country, however, refused to accept the war. Marxian socialism had long taught that workers of all nations were bound by the supreme loyalty of class, that their real enemies were the capitalists of their own countries, that international wars were capitalist and imperialist quarrels, and that class struggle was the only kind of warfare that the proletarian should accept. These socialists denounced the action of the socialist majorities as a sellout to capitalism and imperialism. They met in international conferences with each other and with socialists from the neutral countries. Active among them had been Lenin and other Russian Social Democrats then in Switzerland. “The only task for socialists,” wrote Lenin in 1914, “is to convert the war of peoples into a civil war.” The minority or antiwar socialists met at the small Swiss town of Zimmerwald in 1915, where they drew up a “Zimmerwald program,” calling for immediate peace without annexations or indemnities. This had no effect on most socialists in the belligerent countries. The Zimmerwald group itself soon began to split. Most Zimmerwalders regarded peace, or the repudiation of the war, as their aim. But a “Zimmerwald Left” began to develop, inspired mainly by Lenin and the Russian émigrés. This faction made its aim not peace but revolution. It hoped that the war would go on until it caused social revolution in the belligerent countries.

Then in April 1917, as we have seen, with the German imperial government arranging their trip, Lenin and the other Bolsheviks went back to Russia and accomplished the November Revolution. Lenin, until his death in 1924, believed that the Russian Revolution was only a local phase of a world revolution—of the revolution of strict Marxian doctrine. Russia, for him, was the theater of currently most active operations in the international class war. Because he expected proletarian upheaval to follow soon in Germany, Poland, the Danube valley, and the Baltic regions, he accepted the treaty of Brest-Litovsk. He took no pride in Russia; he was no patriot or “social-chauvinist,” to use his own term. In the founding of the U.S.S.R. in 1922 he saw a nucleus around which other and greater soviet republics of any nationality might coalesce.

The First World War was in fact followed by attempted revolutions in Germany and eastern Europe. With the German and Austro-Hungarian empires wrecked, socialists and liberals of all descriptions strove to establish new regimes. Among socialists the old differences persisted, between those favoring gradual, nonviolent, and parliamentary methods and a more extreme group who saw in postwar disintegration a chance to realize the international proletarian revolution. The first group looked upon the Bolshevik Revolution with horror; the second looked upon it with admiration. The first group included not only trade union officials and practical socialist politicians but also such prewar giants of Marxian exegesis as Karl Kautsky and Eduard Bernstein. Even Kautsky, who had upheld pure Marxism against the revisionism of Bernstein, could not stomach the methods of Lenin. The mass of European socialists, with their fiercest leaders removed, were to remain characterized by relative moderation. Marxist in principle, they were in fact more than ever wedded to gradual, peaceable, and parliamentary methods. The second group, radical Leninists, continued to agitate for the forcible overthrow of European capitalism and European political institutions; and they began to join together in the Bolsheviks’ new organization for promoting world revolution, the Third, or Communist, International, which was created in March 1919.

The Founding of the Third International

The Second International, which since its foundation in 1889 had met every two or three years until 1914, held its first postwar meeting at Berne in 1919. It represented socialist parties and labor organizations of all countries. The Berne meeting was stormy, for a small minority vehemently demanded “revolution as in Russia, socialization of property as in Russia, application of Marxism as in Russia.” Overruled at Berne, they repaired to Moscow and there founded a new International in conjunction with the Russian Communist party, and with Lenin and the Russians dominating it completely. It was Lenin’s hope, by founding a new International of his own, to discredit moderate socialism and to claim for the Communists the true line of succession from the First International of Karl Marx.

The first congress of the Third International in 1919 was somewhat haphazard, but at the second, in 1920, the extreme left parties of 37 countries were represented. The Russian party was supposedly only one component. Actually, it supplied most of the personnel and most of the funds; the Bolshevik Zinoviev was its first president, remaining in this office until his disgrace as a Trotskyist in 1927. The Third, or Communist, International—the Comintern—was in part a spontaneous rallying of Marxists from all countries who accepted the Bolshevik Revolution as the true fruition of Marxism and were willing to follow the Russian lead; but, even more, it was the creation and weapon of the Bolsheviks themselves, by which they wished to discredit and isolate the moderate socialists and bring about world revolution. Of all enemies the Communists hated the socialists most, reserving for them even stronger epithets than they bestowed upon capitalists and imperialists, because Communists and socialists were competing for the same objective, the leadership of the world’s working class.

The second congress of the International, in 1920, endorsed a program of Twenty-One Points, written by Lenin. These included the requirements that each national party must call itself Communist, repudiate “reformist” socialism, propagandize labor unions and get Communists into the important union offices, infiltrate the army, impose an iron discipline upon members, require submission to the orders of the international Executive, use both legal channels and secret underground methods, and expel promptly any member not hewing to the party line. Making no pretense of respect for parliamentary democracy, the second congress ruled that “the only question can be that of utilizing bourgeois state institutions for their own destruction.” The Comintern was not an assemblage of humanitarians engaged in welfare work; it was a weapon for revolution, organized by revolutionaries who knew what revolution was. In most countries, as in France, there were many socialists who could not accept the Twenty-One Points. Once unified socialist parties therefore broke up. Communists and socialists went their separate ways.

For several years the U.S.S.R., using the Comintern or more conventional diplomatic channels, promoted world revolution as best it could. Communists from many countries went to Russia for indoctrination. Native-born or Russian agents proceeded to the Dutch Indies, China, Europe, and America. Until 1927 the Chinese revolutionists welcomed assistance from Moscow; the Russian Borodin became an adviser in their affairs. In 1924, in England, publication of the “Zinoviev letter,” in which the Comintern allegedly urged British workers to provoke revolution, led to a great electoral victory for the Conservative party. The Bolshevik menace, real and imagined, produced everywhere a strong reaction. It was basic to the rise of fascism described in the chapters to follow.

In 1927, with the suppression of Trotskyism and world revolutionism in Russia, and with the concentration under Stalin on a program of building socialism in one country, the Comintern moderated its activities. In 1935, as fascist dictators became noisily bellicose and threatened the Soviet Union, the U.S.S.R. through the Comintern instructed all Communist parties to enter into coalitions with socialists and activist liberals in what were called “popular fronts” to combat fascism and reaction and support the national defense of their own countries. During the Second World War (in 1943), as a gesture of goodwill to Great Britain and the United States, the U.S.S.R. abolished the Comintern entirely. It reappeared for a few years from 1947 to 1956 under a new name, the Communist Information Bureau or Cominform, and was then disbanded.

It was not through the Comintern that the U.S.S.R. exerted its greatest influence on the world in the years after 1917. It exerted its influence by the massive fact of its very existence. By 1939 it was clear that a new type of economic system had emerged. Before 1917 no one in Europe or Asia had thought that anything was to be learned from Russia. Twenty years later even critics of the U.S.S.R. feared that it might represent the wave of the future. Its sheer power was soon demonstrated in the Second World War. Marxism was no longer merely a theory; there was an actual society, embracing a sixth of the globe, which called itself Marxist.

In every country those who were most critical of capitalist institutions compared them unfavorably to those of the Soviet Union. Some believed that something like Soviet results might be obtained without the use of Soviet methods, which were dismissed as typically Russian, a deplorable heritage from the tsars. With the appearance of Communism and Communist parties, socialism and socialist ideas seemed in contrast to be middling and respectable. Everywhere in the 1930s the idea of planning began to find favor. Workers obtained more security against the fluctuations of capitalism. Colonial and formerly colonial peoples, especially in Asia, were particularly impressed by the achievement of the U.S.S.R., which had shown how a traditional society could modernize without falling under the influence of foreign capital or foreign guidance.

For a long time the Communist party in the Soviet Union presented itself as the leader of world revolution and tried to exert control over Communist parties in all other countries. This became increasingly difficult. Over the years the U.S.S.R. pursued diplomatic and military policies and engaged in acts of aggression and territorial expansion, such as the tsarist state might have done. By the late 1980s the U.S.S.R. was no longer an innovative, or some would say, a viable society. Its economic system was in a shambles; the component republics demanded autonomy or independence. The revelation from within the Soviet Union itself of the persecution and deaths of tens of millions of innocent victims, along with the restiveness of its own nationalities, undermined its role as leader of oppressed peoples elsewhere. European Communist parties proclaimed their independence from Moscow. Meanwhile a new form of dynamic communism emerged in 1949 in the People’s Republic of China. Yet all Communist parties, including the Chinese, are derived from Marxism and from the Russian Revolution of 1917, once hailed as the first great victory over capitalism and imperialism. It was thus a revolution that profoundly influenced fervent supporters and passionate opponents throughout the twentieth century. But the repressive political system, stifling cultural policies, and economic failures of the Soviet state also produced a widespread hostility to Communism, even among many of its former advocates and supporters.