Chapter 26

THE INTERNATIONAL REVOLT AGAINST SOVIET COMMUNISM

125. The Crisis in the Soviet Union

126. The Collapse of Communism in Central and Eastern Europe

127. The Collapse of the Soviet Union

128. After Communism

The world was astonished in the mid-1980s to see some of the basic structures of Soviet communism, as they had evolved since the Russian Revolution of 1917, begin to come apart. It was equally surprised by a series of extraordinary events in 1989 in central and eastern Europe, where the existing Communist regimes collapsed one by one and were replaced with virtually no violence. In an even more epochal event in 1991, the Communist regime of the Soviet Union itself, in power for 74 years, ended; and the U.S.S.R. disintegrated into Russia and its other component republics.

In a strict sense there was no actual revolution in 1989-1991, and indeed it was a source of wonder and satisfaction that such sweeping change could occur without armed struggle. The older regimes disappeared less by explosion than by implosion—a breakup from within. The “revolution” could remain peaceful because it faced no strong internal resistance or threat of foreign intervention. Yet the upheavals were revolutionary in that they demolished existing repressive authorities and brought abrupt, radical change. They reasserted ideals that were revolutionary when proclaimed in America in 1776, in France in 1789, throughout Europe in 1848, and in the West in 1919 and 1945 and were now called human rights and civil society. These ideals had been incorporated into the American Declaration of Independence and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man, and they had become the guiding ideals for democracies in most of the modern world. Democracy meant representative and constitutional government and finely contested elections; and freedom and independence meant guarantees against repression by one’s own government or dictatorial foreign rule. Such ideas were now invoked again to support the new political revolutions of 1989.

With the Revolution of 1989 the people of central and eastern Europe could decide their own destiny. With the collapse of the U.S.S.R. one of the two superpowers that had dominated international affairs since 1945 disappeared. The Cold War, as the world had known it, came to an end, even if Russia remained a large and important power. A new global political era opened, understandably with new challenges and frustrations, but also with expectations for a more peaceful international order.

125. THE CRISIS IN THE SOVIET UNION

Neither the transformation of central and eastern Europe nor of the Soviet Union could have taken place as they did without the changes in the U.S.S.R. that began in 1985. It is not easy to explain how the reformist Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev could have risen to supreme power from within the Soviet system except that the country was in dire straits and the party leadership itself was desperate. As a young man Gorbachev studied at the university in Moscow and at the agricultural institute in Stavropol, his home city in southwestern Russia. After working as an agricultural researcher, he received a full-time party assignment in the region and came to the attention of Yuri V. Andropov (soon to be the party general secretary) and other party leaders in Moscow. His appointment to the party secretariat in Moscow in 1978, with special responsibility for agriculture, afforded him a privileged view of the country’s deep economic troubles. By 1980 he was a member of the Politburo, and by 1984 he was being groomed by Andropov for top party leadership. After the frustrating experience of an incapacitated Brezhnev clinging to power and of Andropov and Konstantin U. Chernenko, his two successors,, dying in office after only brief terms, the Politburo in March 1985 decided that it was time for a more forceful, younger leader. At 54, Gorbachev was by far its youngest member. Andrei Gromyko, for many years foreign minister of the U.S.S.R., ultimately endorsed Gorbachev and is said to have reassured those with doubts: “He has a nice smile but he has iron teeth.”

Gorbachev at once demonstrated a dynamism and vigor that had been absent from recent Soviet leadership. His first task was to convince the party and country of the need for fundamental economic restructuring if economic stagnation was to be overcome— perestroika he called it. By perestroika he meant a drastic modification of the centrally planned command economy inherited from Stalin and carried forward with only minor changes since. However well the older system had served the industrialization of the country, the test of the Second World War, and postwar reconstruction, it was ill-suited for the contemporary industrial world. Industry and agriculture urgently needed freedom from restraints to release creative energies, provide incentives for productivity, raise quality levels, and satisfy consumer needs. Gorbachev’s proposed remedies were decentralization; self-management for industry and agriculture; an end to the rigidity imposed by the party and government bureaucracy; and incentives for productivity. He moved cautiously, believing that exhortation and a sense of urgency would bring results, but his appeals and initial moderate reforms quickly clashed with the vested interests of the entrenched bureaucrats.

For his economic restructuring to succeed, Gorbachev had to have the support of the country, which he hoped to win through political change. Thus he also called for glasnost, or “openness,” which he closely linked to economic reform. By glasnost he meant the right to voice the need for change, the freedom to criticize the existing system, and the willingness even to reexamine past mistakes and wrongdoings. Even if it originally had a more limited objective, glasnost soon took on a dynamic of its own. It led to an unprecedented liberalization of Soviet society, a freer press, and an end to the decades of totalitarian control over political, cultural, and intellectual life. The ferment choked off after Khrushchev’s “thaw” was reborn. Newspapers, theater, the arts, and political discourse opened up as at no time before. Books and plays written in the 1960s or earlier but never permitted publication or performance made their appearance, including Pasternak’s Dr. Zhivago and eventually even Solzhenitsyn’s Gulag Archipelago, the novel that gave the outside world the name for Stalin’s network of forced labor camps. Gorbachev permitted the physicist Andrei Sakharov, a leading dissenter and committed opponent of the regime, to return to Moscow from exile and take an active part in political life. Soviet Jews, who had earlier been refused permission to leave the country, were allowed to emigrate in larger numbers. The atmosphere changed visibly. People became freer and less fearful. The legal codes were revised to encompass a measure of civil liberties, allow freedom of expression, and reduce police abuses. The KGB itself came under public and legislative scrutiny. Gorbachev even spoke of freedom of conscience and tolerance for religion, negotiating a rapprochement with the Orthodox church.

In 1987, on the very occasion of the 70th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, Gorbachev spoke openly of “Stalin’s enormous and unforgivable crimes.” A monument to Stalin’s victims was planned, while the press openly discussed their total number, clearly in the tens of millions. New history textbooks were prepared, as well as a revised history of the party. Gorbachev told the country that there should be “no forgotten names or blanks in history or literature.”

Although Gorbachev did not challenge the role of the Communist party as the directing agent of Soviet society, he was clearly introducing changes that would curb its monopoly on power. Remembering how Khrushchev had been dislodged after only a few years, he set out to mobilize a wide popular base for himself. Reform could not simply be imposed from above. The people, he said, needed more than a “good tsar.” Constitutional reforms in 1988 created a new national legislature, and multicandidate elections were to replace the traditional one-party slate of nominees. What began as a technocratic vision of a more efficient economy was moving the country to a sweeping transformation of Soviet life and society.

In the freer atmosphere the government released long-suppressed information about poor grain harvests, inefficient state enterprises, and nuclear accidents before the disaster at Chernobyl in 1986. At party meetings and at the new Congress of People’s Deputies the public heard for the first time outspoken critiques of Soviet society: descriptions of poverty, corruption, crime, alcoholism, and drugs; of serious shortcomings in medicine, health, and housing; of environmental decay. Tens of millions, perhaps one-fifth the population, lived in poverty.

Gorbachev soon recognized that the country’s economic problems were more intractable than he had thought, but he persisted with his gradualist reform program. Private enterprise and state industries were one day to be integrated into a market-based economy, linked to the outside world. Foreign capital for trade and investment and joint ventures with foreign firms were to be welcomed. Soviet managers were encouraged to travel abroad to learn advanced (sometimes elementary) business and accounting practices. But many of these reforms remained paper decrees only; party officials and government bureaucrats helped checkmate others. The older economic system remained virtually unchanged. Gorbachev shrank from moving more rapidly to a market-oriented competitive economy. His concerns about painful short-term dislocations and political unrest reinforced his commitment to reform rather than abandon the older system in its entirety.

Gorbachev’s reforms in agriculture also fell far short of what was needed. Accepting the existing structure of state and collective farms, he did little more than allow them greater managerial autonomy. Production did not rise. Belatedly, he launched a more extensive agrarian policy. Farmers and farm families would be permitted to work with state and collective farms on a share-crop basis, or farm their own land. They could lease land for their lifetime and even bequeath this right to their children. But the state remained the legal owner of the land—not as in China, where Deng had at the very beginning of his reforms dismantled the collective farms, returned the land outright to the farmers, and reaped the benefit in increased production. Despite Gorbachev’s overtures to small independent farmers, little more than one percent of the land shifted to private hands.

But the constitutional and political changes he had initiated significantly loosened the monopoly grip of the party. In March 1989 openly contested, multicandidate elections were held, the first since 1917, though well over half the seats were reserved for the party and various state-sponsored associations. Voters elected a Congress of People’s Deputies, which in turn chose a smaller standing legislative body to meet more frequently. Both were empowered to initiate legislation and freely debate issues. In 1990, under another constitutional reform, the Congress of People’s Deputies created a presidency with broad executive powers modeled on the American and French examples. The Congress elected Gorbachev president.

Gorbachev brought about stunning political changes, unprecedented in the years since the revolution. Western political leaders in the era of the Great Depression had sought to save capitalism by reforming it. Gorbachev was likewise bent on saving the Communist system by reform. Yet the country remained divided and disoriented. It was tom between the old guard, who resisted the Gorbachev changes, and a growing group of democratic reformers in the central legislature and in the newly elected parliaments of the restless component republics who believed that Gorbachev had not gone far enough in either political or economic matters. As time went by, praise for his policies gave way to criticism for the continuing dismal economic record; his indecisive, sometimes contradictory, steps in shaping a market economy; and his reluctance to revamp the collectivized agricultural system. He also seemed determined to repress ethnic unrest and was rejecting the demands of the constituent republics for greater freedom from central control. The military, the industrial bureaucrats, and the party were still in command.

The loosening of totalitarian controls unleashed long-suppressed ethnic tensions in the country. Azerbaijan and Armenia fought over a disputed enclave within Azerbaijan, where the majority of the inhabitants were Armenian; violence also flared up in Georgia and elsewhere. Every one of the 15 federated constituent republics of the Soviet Union began to raise demands for independence. Secessionist pressures understandably went furthest in the three Baltic republics. People in Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia remembered their 20 years of independence between the two world wars; how they had fallen victim to the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939; and how one-third of their population had been killed, deported, or driven into exile in the war and postwar years. In the freer atmosphere of glasnost, the constituent republics, which had come to consider themselves trapped within the Soviet empire, were able to denounce Soviet control. For his part Gorbachev was willing to create a federation council to advise on matters relating to the republics but would not risk the wrath of the old guard by going beyond that.

Gorbachev and the West

As the new era evolved, Communist ideology and the view of world affairs that had helped to create and prolong the Cold War were also transformed. Gorbachev repudiated ideological struggle. He cited the progress of science and technology as requiring “a different road to the future.” In an interdependent globe besieged by nuclear, ecological, and economic dangers, the highest concern must be “universal human interests” and the “universal human idea.” Since Marx and Lenin had taught their followers to reject “universal” ideals as a smoke screen for class rule and oppression, the turnabout was startling.

Gorbachev changed the image of the Soviet Union as a military threat and promoter of world revolution. He became a familiar and popular figure in Western capitals as a negotiator, diplomat, and often Western-style politician. He followed his conciliatory words with deeds. He removed troops and weapons from eastern Europe, negotiated nuclear arms reduction agreements with the United States, ended the war in Afghanistan, and helped to resolve Cold War regional conflicts. And he accepted, even encouraged, reforms in eastern Europe, probably not foreseeing how far they would go. He spoke up for human rights, paid tribute to the standards embodied in the Helsinki accords, and called for a “common European home” for western and eastern Europe. The Cold War of the post-1945 years, which had been brought on, or intensified, by Soviet revolutionary ideology and expansionism—which in turn had led to the American containment policy and countercrusade—gave promise of ending. For Gorbachev, as a matter of policy, detente and arms reduction were essential to relieve the intolerable military burden on the Soviet economy; detente went hand in hand with domestic reform. From their low point in the early 1980s Soviet-United States relations abruptly changed after 1985. Anew and more genuine spirit of detente emerged, holding out higher expectations for peace and disarmament than at any time since 1945.

Early in the Reagan administration, in 1981, Soviet-American discussions had resumed on strategic arms limitations, but in an atmosphere of mistrust, suspicion, and continuing arms buildup. Especially disturbing was the deployment in eastern Europe in the late 1970s of new Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles capable of reaching targets within a radius of 600 to 1,500 miles. Together with its European allies the United States had reinforced existing defenses in western Europe with equally modern American nuclear missiles while simultaneously pressing the Soviets to reduce or remove theirs. The construction of the American missile sites touched off mass popular protest demonstrations in western Europe, but the West European governments remained firm in their support. In Reagan’s first term of office he had not met with the incapacitated Brezhnev or with either of the two ailing Soviet leaders who in quick succession followed him. But in 1985,.after the emergence of Gorbachev, the possibilities for arms limitation opened up. Unlike his predecessors, Gorbachev seemed to view détente as a means to help the ailing Soviet economy and as an essential diplomatic process for avoiding catastrophe in the nuclear age. For his part, Reagan, confident that the United States had rebuilt its own military strength, held four summit meetings with Gorbachev over the next two and a half years.

At their third meeting, in Washington in December 1987, the two presidents made a remarkable breakthrough by consenting to remove the inter-mediate-range missiles each had installed in Europe. Gorbachev agreed also to reduce the number of short-range nuclear missiles. The Soviets were willing to destroy over four times as many missiles as the United States. Even more unprecedented was the Soviet willingness to permit the United States to verify the destruction of the weapons—the on-site verification which had long been a stumbling block to arms reduction. Finally, the two leaders agreed to continue negotiations on the reduction of strategic, or long-range, nuclear weapons.

In summit meetings in Washington and Moscow, the two presidents had closer contact with each other’s people than ever before. Gorbachev mingled with throngs in crowded Washington streets. Reagan, in the shadow of Lenin’s tomb in Moscow, spoke openly about the Soviet repression of dissidents, the refusal to permit Jews to emigrate, religious persecution, and the ongoing war in Afghanistan. Gorbachev in turn committed his country to the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan—a “bleeding wound” he called it. Meanwhile Gorbachev lent encouragement to the vast changes taking place in eastern Europe. In 1990 Gorbachev and President George H. W. Bush, Reagan’s successor, could jointly hail the end of the Cold War. In 1991 they signed a strategic arms treaty pledging each nation to scale down by about a third its arsenal of long-range nuclear missiles.

126. THE COLLAPSE OF COMMUNISM IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE

Meanwhile in the mid-1980s central and eastern Europe remained under Stalinist-type party bosses, some in office for over 30 years, impervious to pressure for reform. But cracks and fissures were apparent even before Gorbachev’s reforms in the Soviet Union. The years of detente had already opened up the East European states to Western loans and investments and to closer contacts with the West. Dissidents called for a recognition of the human rights guaranteed by the Helsinki accords in 1975, to which the Soviet Union and the East European bloc had subscribed. They wrote about ending party-state dictatorships and the restoration one day of a “civil society,” in which people could live their lives free from the dictates of the state.

As in the Soviet Union itself, East Europeans discussed the shortcomings of their centrally planned economies, which had stagnated since the 1970s. Initiative and productivity were stifled, and large subsidies propped up inefficient state-run monopolies unchallenged by competition. The older plants and industrial infrastructure were decaying; the environment was deteriorating. A scarcity of investment capital prevented the growth of new industries. Only in Hungary had decentralizing reforms and tentative steps toward a market economy been adopted. In East Germany, the showcase for achievements under central planning, economic growth had slowed and consumer goods were scarce. Even if state-run planned economies were to continue, many argued for new market competition, incentives for entrepreneurs and workers, and encouragement of joint ventures with the outside capitalist world.

Poland: The Solidarity Movement

In the 1970s and 1980s demands for economic reform and political liberalization surfaced almost everywhere, but nowhere so forcefully as in Poland. Gomulka, who governed Poland for 14 years after 1956, disappointed the reformers. He used troops to put down strikes, persecuted church leaders, and in 1968 permitted an anti-Semitic campaign against the small number of Jews still living in Poland. In 1970, after riots over food prices, the party replaced him with the reform-minded Edmund Gierek, who embarked on an ambitious economic development program, financed by heavy borrowing from the West. The initial results were promising, but to meet its rising debt obligations, the country expanded exports at the expense of domestic consumption. Economic conditions steadily deteriorated.

In 1980 the rise in food prices led to widespread strikes, which began in the Lenin shipyards in Gdansk and spread rapidly. A somewhat freer political atmosphere made it possible for workers to create an aggressive independent trade union federation, Solidarity, the first of its kind in any Communist country. It found a militant leader and national symbol of protest in Lech Walesa. Before long Solidarity claimed a national membership of 10 million industrial and agricultural workers.

With church backing, its leaders called for free elections and a role for Solidarity in government. The Soviets, then still in the Brezhnev era, once again saw a socialist regime threatened. They put heavy pressure on the Polish government and party to curb Solidarity, oust Gierek, and install the dependable and steely General Jaruzelski as party head and premier. When strikes and demonstrations continued, raising the threat of Soviet military intervention, Jaruzelski in 1981 imposed martial law, banned Solidarity, and arrested its leaders.

But once the power of Solidarity was curbed and the Soviet threat of intervention passed, Jaruzelski himself took a different tack. To placate labor he lifted martial law and initiated a reform program of his own. International pressure also contributed to liberalization. John Paul II, the first Polish pope to head the Roman Catholic church, inspired huge demonstrations for freedom during visits to Poland after his elevation to the papacy in 1978; and Lech Walesa was honored with a Nobel Peace Prize in 1983.

Jaruzelski’s efforts at economic reform failed to improve the economy or mollify widespread resentments. Meanwhile, in the later 1980s, Gorbachev’s liberalizing reforms in the Soviet Union encouraged further reforms in Poland and suggested that the Soviets would not intervene to check liberalization in eastern Europe. The growing recognition that the “Brezhnev Doctrine” was dead even encouraged a movement for reform within the Polish Communist party itself.

In 1989 Jaruzelski and the party leadership permitted parliamentary elections, in which Solidarity and other groups were free to put forward candidates, although the Communist party was guaranteed a fixed number of seats. The first open elections in Poland in over 40 years gave Solidarity a landslide victory in all contested seats. A Solidarity-led coalition cabinet was formed in which the Communists were a minority. The party took steps to transform itself into a Western-type socialist party, but many of its members drifted away. The party-state dictatorship ended without bloodshed. The dike in eastern Europe was breached.

The new government moved at once to restructure the economy along free-market lines. Sharp differences emerged between Lech Walesa, elected president in 1990, and his one-time political allies; and former Communists soon returned to the political scene, but Poland was henceforth in charge of its own destiny.

Hungary: Reform into Revolution

In Hungary the attempt at reform in 1956, initiated by the Communist party leadership itself, had been brusquely interrupted when the Soviets intervened with troops and tanks to suppress the “counterrevolution.” Imre Nagy, the party leader, and other leaders of the revolt were hanged. For the next 32 years, hard-liner János Kádár ran the country. But even under Kádár the party, without relinquishing its monopoly on political control, moved away from an inflexible centrally planned economy, encouraged a degree of private enterprise, and turned to the West for capital investment. For a time the economy expanded and standards of living rose, but the limited reforms accomplished no fundamental change. After 1985, in the wake of Gorbachev’s reforms in the Soviet Union, some of which were modeled on the Hungarian example itself, a new drive for political and social change began to develop.

In 1988 the party, eager to encourage change and still maintain power, eased Kádár out of office. The new leadership opened the way to opposition parties and multiparty elections and began to dismantle the older party-state apparatus. It dissolved the Communist party, reconstituting it along socialist and social-democratic lines, and a wide range of independent political groups came forward. Reform, initiated by the party itself, had turned into revolution, and without bloodshed. The new leaders reclaimed the 1956 uprising as a progressive movement and formally condemned those who had invited Soviet intervention. Nagy’s body was exhumed from a mass grave and given a hero’s reburial. By sweeping aside the humiliation of 1956, the country reasserted its national independence, restored self-government and civic freedom, and opened the way to a market-oriented economy and a pluralist democracy.

The developments in Hungary precipitated even more dramatic events. The new Hungary, looking westward, symbolically demolished a portion of the barbed-wire barrier on its Austrian border. A few months later, in September 1989, when large numbers of East Germans vacationing in Hungary sought to emigrate to the West, Hungary opened its border with Austria and allowed the Germans to exit. For the first time since 1961 East Germans found a safe way to leave their country.

The German Democratic Republic: Revolution and Reunification

Given Gorbachev’s positive attitude toward reform, it was understandable that the pace of change in eastern Europe would accelerate, but neither he nor anyone else could have anticipated its full dimensions. In the four hard-line dictatorships—the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania—there still appeared to be little chance for a Communist sharing of power in the spring of 1989, let alone a revolutionary transformation. Yet by the end of that year the Communist regimes had fallen in all of these countries.

In the German Democratic Republic Erich Honecker, in power since 1961, stubbornly held the line against reform. Although the country boasted the strongest economy and highest per capita income in eastern Europe, its citizens enjoyed far fewer amenities than the West Germans. The Berlin Wall built in 1961 still barred their exodus to the West. Even though Honecker had agreed after 1970 to the closer economic and political relations with West Germany initiated by Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik in 1969, he refused to relax controls at home. But the East Germans excitedly watched the Gorbachev changes in the Soviet Union and the rush of events in Poland and Hungary. When in the autumn of 1989 Hungary opened the way for them to leave, thousands seized the opportunity. The trickle soon became a flood. The East Germans, many of them skilled workers and professionals, fled the repression and drabness of the German Democratic Republic for the Federal Republic of Germany, where as Germans they were entitled by law to receive citizenship and assistance in finding homes and jobs. By the end of 1989, 350,000 of East Germany’s population of 17 million had left, and many more emigrated in the early months of 1990.

When demonstrations against the East German government mounted, Gorbachev clearly signaled that Honecker could not expect the Soviet troops stationed in East Germany to save the regime, and he even warned against the use of force to prevent reform. In Leipzig, over 100,000 demonstrators, assembling in churches, marched in solemn procession with lighted candles, calling for the resignation of party and government leaders and for an end to the police state. The party forced Honecker to resign.

The new leadership promised elections and confirmed the right of free and unrestricted travel. On November 9, 1989, when the government opened up the hated symbol of confinement itself, the Berlin Wall, excited Berliners on both sides of the barrier tore it down. The exodus to West Germany continued. By now even the new freedom of movement, the end of censorship, the new parliamentary supervision over the state security police, and the pledge of free elections did not suffice. Many East Germans were infuriated by public disclosure of the corruption and luxurious living that Honecker and the party elite had enjoyed while ordinary people suffered over the years. The entire party structure now came crashing down. The Politburo and Central Committee resigned. Honecker and other leaders were arrested on charges of corruption and embezzlement, and younger reformers assumed control. Delegates from a wide variety of opposition groups, exultant over their “gentle” revolution, met with reform-minded representatives of the former Communist party to oversee the transition to a new constitutional regime, which many still envisaged as a socialist but democratic society.

Once the German Democratic Republic was no longer Communist, however, pressure for reunification began to build. Helmut Kohl, the Christian Democratic chancellor in West Germany, took the initiative to reunite the two Germany s. For many of the wartime Allies the prospect of a reunified Germany of close to 80 million people, possessing one of the world’s most powerful economies, stirred grim ghosts of the past. The “German question” resurfaced. The entire postwar settlement stood at issue. Since no final peace treaty had ever been signed, reunification required the approval of the four major Allied powers of the Second World War. There was hesitation, especially in France and Britain, but it was difficult, as the Americans argued, to deny the German people the right of self-determination 45 years after the end of the war. Moreover, the Federal Republic of Germany had demonstrated its commitment to democracy. There was confidence that a reunified Germany could integrate East Germany and remain part of democratic western Europe and the European Community. Despite the unspeakable crimes of the Nazi era, it seemed unreasonable to insist upon unalterable traits of national character or to punish future generations for atrocities of the past.

Reunification moved forward swiftly. The four Allied powers, including the U.S.S.R., gave their approval and relinquished their occupation rights. Germany confirmed the earlier cession of territories in the east to the U.S.S.R. and Poland and pledged the inviolability of the German-Polish border. The two German states merged their economies and the West German mark became the common currency. On October 3,1990, the two states formally united to become an enlarged Federal Republic of Germany, its capital to be reestablished within a few years in Berlin. In the first nationwide elections, Chancellor Kohl and his Christian Democrats, who played a key role in the reunification, won a sweeping victory. Although the postelection exhilaration was soon tempered by the gigantic problems of modernizing and absorbing the thoroughly decayed East German economy, Germany had been reunited under democratic auspices.

Czechoslovakia: "‘89 is ‘68 Upside Down"

In Czechoslovakia the ruling hard-liners who took power after Soviet military forces had ruthlessly crushed the “Prague spring” in 1968 disapproved of Gorbachev’s reforms in the Soviet Union and stifled dissent at home. But the dissidents quietly grew in numbers and influence. Charter ’77, an organization of intellectuals formed after the Helsinki accords of 1975, became a rallying point for the struggle against the dictatorship. The Czech public followed with intense interest the disintegration of Communist power in Poland, Hungary, and East Germany. When demonstrations broke out in the autumn of 1989, the government arrested the dissident leaders, but thousands of demonstrators in Prague called for the release of the imprisoned dissidents and for the government’s resignation. Reformers came together in a loose coalition and found inspiring leadership in the dissident writer Vaclav Havel, an outspoken opponent of the regime who had repeatedly suffered persecution and imprisonment for his views.

The demonstrations grew in intensity. When 350,000 demonstrators in Prague on November 24 furiously demanded an end to the party-state dictatorship and a general strike threatened to bring the country to a standstill, the government and party leaders all at once resigned. Alexander Dubček, the hero of 1968, dramatically appeared on a balcony alongside a new reform-minded Communist prime minister, who appointed opposition leaders to his cabinet, pledged a free press and free elections, dissolved the secret police, and abolished the compulsory teaching of Marxism-Leninism in the universities.

The party’s 41-year monopoly on power ended. Havel became provisional president and led a new cabinet in which the Communists were a minority. Gorbachev took steps to withdraw the 75,000 Soviet troops stationed in the country since 1968. In the excitement someone exultantly observed: “’89 is ’68 upside down.” The people had wrested control without bloodshed in a “velvet” revolution that liberated the country.

Of all the nations in the Eastern bloc Czechoslovakia had the strongest democratic tradition. Despite long-standing ethnic tensions, it had developed a genuine parliamentary democracy in the interwar years and was the last of the East European states to fall under Communist dictatorship after the Second World War. Even though its economy was one of the strongest of the Eastern bloc, it lagged far behind the West and required large infusions of capital to modernize its older technology. It moved rapidly toward a market-oriented economy and a pluralist democracy—the civil society that Havel, now elected president of the republic, and others had sought. But an unexpected political sequel followed within three years. The country came apart when Slovak political leaders pressed for an independent Slovakia, which some had wanted since 1918. A negotiated settlement arranged for the peaceful division of the country in January 1993 into two independent and sovereign nations—the Czech Republic and Slovakia.

Bulgaria's Palace Revolution, Bloodshed in Romania

Even Bulgaria, considered the most docile of the Soviet client states, succumbed to the new revolutionary contagion. Mass demonstrations in Sofia demanded an end to the Communist dictatorship, and pressure from within the party forced the resignation of the party chief who had run the country for 35 years. His foreign minister, who replaced him, pledged parliamentary elections, economic reforms, and an end to the party’s absolute control of power. New political groups emerged, fragmented yet strong enough to press for reform.

The revolution in Bulgaria was essentially a palace coup within the party, but it, too, arose in response to deep mass resentments. In a country that had known little freedom even in the pre-Communist years, the question was whether the reform-minded former Communists who, like many others elsewhere, renamed themselves Socialists, could work together with the new opposition to create a true democracy.

Only in Romania did events take a violent turn in 1989. It seemed at first as though the revolution would not even reach Bucharest. Since 1965, the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu had firmly controlled party and government, ruling with the help of his wife and family and building a cult of personality around himself. He remained isolated in a rigid autocracy with a large private security force, which he favored over the regular army. His Stalin-like ambition was to transform a backward agrarian society into a modern industrial society regardless of the human cost. For his modernization program he borrowed heavily from the West, but to remain independent of the outside world he insisted that the country regularly pay the burdensome interest on its debt. He used state resources to build an enormous presidential palace. All dissent was kept under tight surveillance and control. What was distinctive about Ceausescu was his break from Moscow and his independent position in foreign and military affairs. Unlike the other members of the Warsaw Pact, he had supported Israel in the Arab-Israeli wars and had refused to join the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968.

Throughout the revolutionary autumn of 1989 Ceausescu ignored the upheavals in central and eastern Europe. But in December protest riots broke out in Timisoara, a key provincial capital. The military refused to fire on the demonstrators, but the dictator’s security forces took over, killing hundreds. Word of the brutality spread, sparking new protests. When the security forces attempted to suppress demonstrators in Bucharest, angry crowds forced the dictator to flee the capital.

For days a battle raged between the security forces and regular army units supporting the revolutionists until the security forces were routed. Ceausescu and his wife were apprehended in the provinces and executed by a firing squad. A National Salvation Front, consisting of former officials of the Ceausescu regime and emergent opposition leaders, took control. Although former Communists dominated the new regime and the strength of the democratic forces remained limited, the party’s authority ended and the most repressive dictatorship of the Eastern bloc came to an ignominious end.

The Revolutions of 1989 in Central and Eastern Europe

Except in Romania, the revolution was carried out everywhere by placards and candles, not by rifles. Solidarity’s early struggle in Poland and Gorbachev’s liberalization in the Soviet Union made it possible for revolutionary changes in central and eastern Europe to take place as they did. With a suddenness that took even the closest observers by surprise, smoldering discontents flared up all at once. Gorbachev, committed to curtailing economic and military obligations for the sake of the Soviet economy, accepted the end of the Communist regimes imposed by Stalin after the Second World War.

The groundwork for change had been prepared by the growing economic ties and contacts with the West during the years of détente, the Helsinki accords, the stubborn challenge of Solidarity, and the courage of the dissidents. But it was Gorbachev’s clear signal that the Soviets would not intervene outside their own borders that made the stupendous chain of revolutionary events possible, toppling one regime after another. The dramatic flight of the East Germans symbolized the desire of all eastern Europe to escape from behind the iron curtain. The revolutionists, armed only with a moral cause, would have found it difficult to prevail if any of their own governments had chosen to use the full power of the army and police. The repression at Tiananmen Square in China in June 1989 might have been repeated in eastern Europe. But the ruling elites, without Soviet support to bolster them, yielded; they simply lacked the will to govern under a system that had lost legitimacy and credibility, even among those who controlled it.

127. THE COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION

Before the stunning developments in eastern Europe could be fully absorbed, an even more epochal event occurred. An all but bloodless revolution brought the collapse of communism in 1991 in the very epicenter of world communism, undoing the Russian Revolution of 1917 and ending three-quarters of a century of Communist party rule. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, heir to the one-time tsarist empire, dissolved into its component republics. Russia reemerged.

How did this collapse of a seemingly impregnable regime with a heavy apparatus of military and police security occur? We have already seen how Gorbachev in the years after 1985 opened up Soviet society to revitalize the system but avoided the more decisive measures that might have ended the hegemony of the Communist party. Gorbachev vacillated between the reformers and the hard-line conservatives. A superb political tactician-no one could have brought the party and the system as far as he had—he nonetheless gave the impression that he did not know how thorough a transformation he would ultimately permit. The old guard became further embittered as they witnessed the loss of Soviet control over eastern Europe. Meanwhile the economy worsened, and by 1990 production was in steep decline. Gorbachev tried plan after plan, but the economic structure remained virtually unchanged. In addition, not only the Baltic republics, as might have been expected, but the Russian republic itself and all the other component republics of the U.S.S.R. were pressing for sovereignty—self-government and control over their political and economic fortunes.

The "Creeping Coup d'État"

In the autumn of 1990 Gorbachev again was maneuvering. He replaced reform-minded ministers and other key officials with old-guard appointees unsympathetic to his reform program. He summarily abandoned an important “500-Day” economic plan that would have freed prices and moved more swiftly to a market economy. The plan would also have curtailed the military budget and given broad economic powers to the republics. It now appeared that military force was to be deployed against the secessionist Baltic republics, which earlier, in the spring of 1990, had proclaimed their independence. In January 1991 Soviet troops, apparently taking matters into their own hands without Gorbachev’s prior approval, used military force against demonstrators in Lithuania, with a loss of lives; and there was anxiety about where the military might move next.

The democratic reformers grew alarmed by the turn of events. Some spoke of “six wasted years of reform communism” and of a “creeping coup d’état.” They had concluded that the country’s economic problems could not be resolved short of demolishing the entire central planning structure, and also that each republic must be allowed to work out its own destiny. To the reformers Gorbachev seemed a barrier to further change, and he in turn grew increasingly hostile to them, convinced that he alone knew the proper pace of reform.

The democratic reformers turned to a political figure who on the surface seemed an unlikely choice as their leader. Boris N. Yeltsin was blunt and outspoken, not by any definition an intellectual. His personal style made a striking contrast to the suave, smooth, and urbane Gorbachev, but Yeltsin knew the Communist party well, and all its secrets. He had been party boss in Moscow and a member of the Politburo. When in 1987 he openly attacked the privileges, perquisites, and downright incompetence of the party officials, he had been dismissed from his posts, vilified in the press, and sent off into the political wilderness. Humiliated by Gorbachev and the party, he found allies among the democratic reformers, who saw in him a populist figure around whom they could rally public support. They helped polish some of his rough edges, undertook his political reeducation, and converted him into an opposition leader of stature.

Elected to the Soviet legislature in March 1989, he played a key role in the opposition. With the encouragement of his political allies, however, he turned to a new, and seemingly unpromising, power base, the Russian legislature, that is, the legislature of the Russian constituent republic. Elected to it in 1990, he became chairman and used his position to step up his attacks on Gorbachev, the party, and the central government. Then, benefiting from a Gorbachev concession permitting the constituent republics to choose their presidents in direct popular elections, he won election in June 1991 as president of the Russian republic in an overwhelming victory over his Communist opponents—the first president in Russian history to be elected by popular vote. It was a distinction that Gorbachev, elected president of the U.S.S.R. solely by the Soviet Congress, could not claim. (It was at the time of Yeltsin’s election that Russia’s second largest city voted to change its name from Leningrad back to St. Petersburg, as it had been called before 1914.) From his new position of strength Yeltsin demanded immediate independence for the three Baltic states and self-government for Russia and the other Soviet constituent republics.

Gorbachev, intent on keeping the country and the union intact, began negotiations with the presidents of the republics. He agreed to surrender considerably more autonomy to the 15 republics, including substantial control over the economic and financial resources that Moscow had always tightly guarded. The three Baltic republics, insisting on full independence, refused to participate in the negotiations, as did Georgia, now embroiled in its own internal turmoil. But in August 1991 the Russian republic and eight other constituent republics agreed to sign Gorbachev’s “union treaty,” which created a framework for the republics to share power within a new political federation.

The Failed August Coup

For the old-guard hard-liners in the party, the military, and the secret police the treaty was the final straw—the end of the union as originally created by Lenin in 1922 after the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing civil wars. Despite lip service to the sovereignty of the republics and the federal structure set forth in the Soviet constitution, the Soviet Union was from the beginning, and increasingly under Stalin, a Russian-dominated centralized nation, virtually the successor to the empire of the tsars. To abandon the union was more than many of the old guard could tolerate. The day before the treaty was to be signed, a small coterie of eight hard-liners acted to seize power. They included high-ranking party and government functionaries, among them, the head of the KGB and the commander of the Soviet land forces. All key figures were Gorbachev appointees. Several of the plotters, including the chief of Gorbachev’s personal cabinet, arrived at Gorbachev’s summer home in the Crimea, possibly hoping to win him to their side. When under forced detention he refused to cooperate or yield to pressure, they proclaimed a Committee of State Emergency to replace him.

The Putschists expected the coup to be a simple operation. Resistance in the country, they were convinced, could be overcome by a simple show of military strength. But they miscalculated, underestimating the new political forces alive in the country. Gorbachev disavowed the plotters. In Moscow Yeltsin gained additional stature when he rallied the Russian legislature in defense of Gorbachev, warned that anyone supporting the coup would be subject to grave criminal charges, and appealed for popular support against any military show of force. But the assault never came. At least one KGB unit disobeyed orders to attack; other tank units advanced only half-heartedly. There was some sporadic street fighting, and three civilian deaths. The coup failed within four days. The plotters turned out to be feckless and irresolute bunglers. The Central Committee of the party did not speak out during these events, but its silence seemed to sanction the attempted coup.

Gorbachev, his ordeal over, returned to Moscow. He had demonstrated with courage that he was not the prisoner of the old guard and now went further. Because of the party’s complicity in the affair, he resigned as general secretary. Yet he still failed to comprehend how far matters had gone. He believed it sufficient only to replace the traitors and “return to the business of reform.” Once again he defended “socialism” as “the choice made in 1917” and stressed the need to preserve the unity of the U.S.S.R. so that the country would not fall apart.

Yeltsin acted immediately and decisively on an entirely different agenda. As president of the Russian republic, he issued a series of decrees, describing the Communist party as “not a political party but an unlawful apparatus that took over the Soviet state” and denouncing it as “one of the principal villains” in the attempted coup. Suspending its activities throughout the Russian republic, he transferred to the state the party’s vast property, along with its files and archives. The Soviet Congress of People’s Deputies meeting in Moscow soon validated the decrees for the entire country before voting itself out of existence. In many ways what happened in the aftermath of the failed coup was the culmination of the Gorbachev six-year reform era. But the dissolution of the party-state regime, at Yeltsin’s hands, was the revolution.

All that remained of the earlier framework was a federation council consisting of the presidents of the constituent republics, over which Gorbachev continued to preside. It immediately recognized the independence of the three Baltic republics. For the country as a whole Gorbachev still hoped to salvage his older idea, a “union of sovereign states,” which, while granting self-government to the republics, would retain a central authority. But the republics pressed for full independence; hostility toward central authority had intensified after the bungled coup. The very party leaders, as in the Ukrainian S.S.R., who themselves once suppressed separatist movements, had by now taken over the leadership of nationalist independence movements.

The Ukrainian S.S.R. proclaimed itself independent as Ukraine (no longer to be referred to as the Ukraine) immediately after the August coup. In December, Yeltsin announced that Russia would not remain in the union without Ukraine. Thereupon the three Slavic states—Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus (the new name for Byelorussia), the states that had originally created the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in December 1922—dissolved it. Gorbachev resigned as president. Yeltsin at once occupied his office in the Kremlin.

The other republics of the Soviet Union also agreed to its dissolution.

A loose organization called the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) consisting of Russia and ten other republics came into existence.[1] The Baltic states had already gone their separate ways. Georgia, still in turmoil, did not join until a few years later. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for close to seven decades the world’s largest multinational state, stretching over one-sixth the earth’s surface and 11 time zones, with close to 300 million people, one of the world’s two superpowers for over 40 years after the Second World War, simply disappeared as a geographic entity. Russia, still the world’s largest nation in area and itself a mixture of many peoples, succeeded to the Soviet Union’s permanent seat on the UN Security Council.

[1]The 11 republics affiliating themselves with the Commonwealth of Independent States, created December 25, 1991, as successor to the U.S.S.R. in order of population (with their capitals in parentheses) were as follows: Russian Federation (Moscow), Ukraine (Kiev), Uzbekistan (Tashkent), Kazakhstan (Alma-Ata), Belarus (Minsk), Azerbaijan (Baku), Tajikistan (Dushanbe), Moldova (Chisinau), Kyrgyzstan (Bishkek), Turkmenistan (Ashkhabad), and Armenia (Yerevan). Georgia (Tbilisi) joined in 1993. Former Communist leaders retained control of most of the new governments until the early twenty-first century, when revolutionary, democratizing changes took place in several of the republics.

Gorbachev returned to private life, declaring “the main task” of his life to have been accomplished. He has to be counted as one of the great reformers in history.

The “Gorbachev factor,” as it has been called, made an immeasurable difference. His tragedy was that he failed to build a new system to replace the communism that he had undermined. He unleashed powerful winds of change that ultimately he could not direct or control. He drastically altered a totalitarian system yet refused to recognize that the demolition of the entire structure was necessary. Eventually he became a danger to the old order and an impediment to the new. Yeltsin, who took undisguised satisfaction in the fall of his once all-powerful rival, said of him: “We, like the world, respect him for what he did, especially in the first years of perestroika beginning with 1985 and 1986.” After that, he said, the “errors” began. Russia, predicted George Kennan, one of America’s preeminent diplomat-historians and Russian specialists, would eventually regard Gorbachev as the “person who led it out of bondage” even if “he was unable to reach the Promised Land.” But it was not yet time to render final historical judgments. For the vast lands and peoples that had once been the Soviet Union, and for Russia and Yeltsin himself in 1991, the future held many uncertainties, a future in which the entire world had an enormous stake.

128. AFTER COMMUNISM

Marxist-Leninist ideology as the undergirding for one-party dictatorship still persisted at the opening of the twenty-first century in the People’s Republic of China, the world’s most populous country, and in the smaller states of North Korea, Vietnam, and Cuba. Albania, the last of the Communist regimes in Europe, and the most impoverished, threw off Communist rule in 1991. Yugoslavia’s disintegration after the end of communism, as we shall see, unfolded separately. In western Europe, most notably in France, Italy, Spain, and Portugal, once strong Communist parties reexamined their beliefs, at times abandoned the party name, and adapted to changed circumstances. Marxism, born in the mid-nineteenth century in response to the instability and inequities of industrial capitalism, would survive as a scholarly, analytical tool; but it held little or no popular appeal as a political philosophy and program of political action. Proletarian internationalism likewise lost much of its appeal because it had been used to support an ill-concealed Soviet hegemony.

The revolutions of the late twentieth century in the Soviet Union and central and eastern Europe seemed to herald the international triumph of the historic political liberalism of Western societies. The democratic reformers sought free elections, political and civil rights, and respect for human dignity. Their people had too long been the pawns of totalitarian party-state regimes which self-righteously demanded sacrifice and subservience in the name of an ultimate utopia. The reformers objected to the centrally planned bureaucratic command economies, which had deprived almost everyone of decent living standards. They envied the immeasurably more prosperous economies of the United States, western Europe, and elsewhere, even if they, too, had their share of inequalities, economic insecurity, and social and ethnic problems. The official formula that all citizens enjoyed the rights and privileges of an egalitarian “socialist” society had only concealed political repression, economic stagnation, and social immobility. For many, the public revelation of the Communist party elite’s special privileges and luxuries proved the final shock.

The revolutionary changes made possible, but did not guarantee, democratic and pluralist societies in which the citizens themselves through responsible government could shape their political and economic future. The road to democracy and free economies was not an easy one. If democratic governments failed to take root, new authoritarian political parties and repressive governments could reemerge. The revolutionary changes released many ugly currents, ominous for the future—anti-Semitism, xenophobia, chauvinistic nationalism, irredentism—all easily mobilized when discontented people seek scapegoats for their frustrations.

Russia, the other former Soviet republics, and the countries of central and eastern Europe entered a period of difficult transition. In principle, they were transforming their political systems into representative democracies and their centrally planned economies into competitive market economies. But bureaucrats and managers of the old order often remained in control under new labels. Many, especially in Russia, used the knowledge and networks of privileged positions in the older regimes to benefit financially from the newly privatized enterprises. Despite infusions of international aid, the new regimes struggled to cope with the disorienting challenges of a free market, capitalist economy, new technologies, and a global financial system.

The market economy could take many forms. The state had always played a large role in central and eastern Europe. It was unlikely that the new regimes would turn to a pure laissez-faire model of private enterprise, which did not actually exist in even the most capitalist Western economies. Governments would remain actively engaged, seeking to ensure a protective network of social services. As for socialism, marginal as it was in American life, democratic socialism and social democracy still had considerable appeal in Europe.

The Soviet experience had tarnished, even poisoned, the image of socialism; but its egalitarian message retained an attraction when linked to respect for democracy and individual rights as propounded by various European Socialist and Social Democratic parties. Meanwhile all countries with capitalist market economies and democratic political systems, in the West and elsewhere, were challenged to create societies that could overcome economic instability, individual insecurity, unemployment, and gross social and economic injustices. Democracies and market economies offered a means toward desired ends, not final goals in themselves. It was now generally assumed, however, that prosperity and productivity could do far more to overcome social inequities than would-be utopias.

Russia after 1991

At the close of 1991 the Russian flag replaced the Soviet hammer and sickle over the Kremlin. As of January 1,1992, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ceased to exist. The 15 Soviet republics were independent states. Officially, the Russia that emerged from the Soviet Union was the Russian Federation, with 21 “federated republics” of its own and with numerous additional ethnic-based territorial units. With almost twice the land area of the United States and a population of almost 150 million, Russia, even if in desperate economic straits, was still a significant world power.

The most pressing international concern was the nuclear weaponry of the former U.S.S.R. Yeltsin had worked out an agreement with the other former Soviet republics whereby Russia alone was to retain nuclear weapons. Although four-fifths of the nuclear weapons were located on Russian soil, nuclear arms were positioned in Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Belarus. The United States mediated an agreement under which the three republics consented to dismantle their weapons in return for generous financial reimbursement. Russia for its part soon began the initial stage of dismantling its vast arsenal of strategic weapons in accordance with the arms reduction treaty that had been signed with the United States in 1991.

The new Russia, like the Soviet Union in its final stages, faced separatist threats. Several of its “federated republics” adopted their own constitutions, flags, and anthems and before long enjoyed considerable de facto independence from Moscow. Only in the southern Chechen Republic did the secessionist threat become reality, and before long Russia was involved in a brutal, draining war to prevent secession by Chechnya. Meanwhile 25 million Russians who had long made their home in other parts of the former Soviet Union came to be regarded in those places as foreigners and in some instances were treated with hostility.

In domestic affairs Yeltsin faced severe economic problems. He and his succession of prime ministers met with little success in making the transition to a market economy. In the first four years of Yeltsin’s presidency production declined, the ruble fell in value, and standards of living sank. Life at times seemed more trying for the average citizen than before the collapse of communism. The regional and local governments tended to ignore Moscow and even withheld tax collections. The erosion of government authority contributed to widening corruption and crime throughout the country.

Despite large infusions of capital from the United States and international lending agencies, the Russian economy and financial institutions remained in deep disorder. After temporizing at first, Yeltsin turned to a Western-oriented economist as his key adviser and economics minister in the belief that a swift transition to a market economy would be the least painful course. From late 1991, a flood of decrees deregulated prices, ended or cut subsidies to state-owned industries, and moved forward with privatization. But most Russians suffered a serious decline in living standards by the spring of 1992 while privatization enriched others who bought into former state industries at bargain prices. An industrial and financial oligarchy of “robber barons” developed a system of crony capitalism; and a shadow economy run by mafia-type gangsters appeared on the borderlines of the legal system.

The failure of the economic program intensified Yeltsin’s struggle with the legislature, where a mixed group of Communists and nationalists rejected the austerity program and attacked the “elite theorists” who had allowed prices to rise. In the spring of 1993 a frustrated Yeltsin appealed to the country to support a new constitution that would provide for “a strong presidential republic.” That September Yeltsin dissolved the legislature and called for new elections as well as for a referendum on his proposed constitution. For two weeks the lawmakers, denouncing the dissolution as “a coup d’état,” refused to leave the parliament building. Demonstrators, incited by the legislative leaders, threatened insurrection. Yeltsin felt bound to act. On October 4 tanks fired on the building and set it ablaze. The legislators were evacuated and the leaders were arrested. Over 100 persons died in the confrontation and many more were injured. In point of fact, both sides shared in the blame for the conflict, but the violence showed that Russia was still going through its revolution.

The new constitution, approved in December 1993, gave broad political authority to the president, including the right to dissolve the legislature. A popularly elected lower house, the State Duma, the old name deliberately chosen because of its pre-Soviet roots, replaced the former Congress of People’s Deputies. The elections to the new Duma proved a setback for the candidates of the reform parties, who had underestimated popular discontent. The Communist party and its political allies won a good share of the seats. The top popular vote winner, an ultranationalist, Vladimir Zhirinovsky by name, spoke openly in inflammatory rhetoric of reuniting the old Russian empire and reviving Russia’s military might.

In a stinging rebuke to Yeltsin, the new Duma in one of its first acts voted amnesty to the legislative leaders arrested in October—and to the hard-line old-guard plotters against Gorbachev in the failed coup of August 1991. Lacking the necessary political support, Yeltsin’s ministers abandoned many of the economic reforms and restored government controls on wages, prices, and profits. Yeltsin himself as president now possessed greatly expanded executive powers but diminishing authority. He was showing physical and emotional strain. Erratic and impulsive, with worsening health problems and given to excessive drinking, he was frequently absent from his Kremlin office over the remaining years of his presidency, and at times vanished from public view.

Meanwhile, Yeltsin’s political troubles continued in the Chechen Republic. Chechnya, in the oil-rich Caucasus, its population mostly Islamic, had a long tradition of rebellion and stubborn resistance to Russian domination. In 1991, as the Soviet Union was collapsing, the Chechens had demanded independence, or at least equal partnership with Russia. Militant guerrilla forces now proclaimed independence, but Russia was intent on retaining control of its southern borderlands and the links to central Asia as well as strategic oil resources and pipelines. The threat of a secessionist precedent for other federal republics was also an ongoing concern.

For three years Yeltsin did nothing except to support covert efforts to overthrow the rebel regime. Suddenly, toward the end of 1994, at the urging of his entourage who saw an opportunity to make political capital out of a quick victory, Yeltsin gave orders to invade Chechnya. In a grievous failure of military intelligence the invasion led to disastrous results. For close to two years the Russian army sank into a frustrating guerrilla war for which its poorly trained conscript army was ill-prepared and ill-equipped. When the army failed to take the capital city of Grozny, the military resorted to air bombing and rockets, killing thousands of civilians. In April 1996 Yeltsin, admitting that the military action in Chechnya was “the greatest mistake” of his first four years as president, withdrew the army. Chechen cities, towns, and villages had been destroyed and some 20,000 to 40,000 of Russia’s Chechen citizens had been killed. The war was widely criticized at home and abroad, and the Chechen independence struggle was not yet over.

In the presidential elections of June 1996 Yeltsin, agile politician that he was, won reelection but only after he was forced into a run-off with the Communist party’s candidate. The Chechen war cost Yeltsin some support, but the weak state of the economy was his most serious handicap. The economic stagnation and draining budgetary deficits continued well into Yeltsin’s second term. In March 1998 Yeltsin appointed a cabinet of young reformers who in turn met with opposition. Economic difficulties assumed enormous proportions: a deep slide in the ruble, currency devaluation, and default in payments on the country’s foreign debt. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Western banks stepped in to prevent utter bankruptcy.

The deteriorating economy brought further political instability. Yeltsin made a whole series of short-lived cabinet appointments and changed his prime minister five times in 18 months. Finally, in August 1999, he appointed as his prime minister Vladimir V. Putin, a former intelligence operative who had been stationed in East Germany and then served as head of the domestic security agency, the reorganized KGB. It was transparent that Yeltsin was choosing his successor to run in the presidential elections in 2000.

Suddenly trouble broke out anew in Chechnya. Chechen guerrillas crossed over into the neighboring republic of Dagestan in an unsuccessful effort to agitate for support. In the fall of 1999 mysterious explosions in Moscow and nearby cities took the lives of some 300 civilians. Prime Minister Putin at once blamed the explosions on Chechen terrorists and the government proceeded to take drastic military measures. Intent on avoiding the costly Russian mistakes of the earlier war, the army launched large-scale air and artillery attacks on the Chechen cities and countryside. The results for the Chechen population were deadly, with a minimal loss of Russian troops. Over 4,000 deaths were reported and over 200,000 refugees were forced to flee their homes. The Chechen capital was destroyed. The United States and its allies condemned the Russian response, but the government’s aggressive action was popular in Russia and Putin’s decisiveness enhanced his political stature.

On the last day of December 1999 Yeltsin dramatically announced his resignation and, in accordance with the constitution, appointed Putin acting president. The date of the presidential elections was advanced by three months. Yeltsin had found his successor. In the elections that followed in the spring of 2000 Putin readily won election.

Yeltsin left a mixed record. He had not been a pioneering champion of reform in the U.S.S.R. as Gorbachev had been in 1985, but once ousted from the inner circles of the party he allied himself with the reformers. He was the first democratically elected president of the Russian republic while it was still part of the U.S.S.R., and he supported the independence movements of the other Soviet republics. He rallied the population to reject the hard-liners’ coup against Gorbachev and became a chief architect of the Soviet Union’s dissolution. His efforts to introduce Western-style market reforms met with only limited success. He had supported the disastrous intervention in Chechnya in 1994-1996, which exposed the incompetence of the army and alienated international opinion, and the renewed assault on Chechnya a few years later. In his second term it seemed possible that reforms might turn the economy around, but within two years his economic program was in shambles. Yeltsin enjoyed the trappings of power, but he was uninterested in the details of government. Power in the country had shifted to a group of industrial tycoons allied with a coterie of Kremlin insiders. His two terms as president disappointed his Western sympathizers and democratic reformers within Russia as well. Yet he left the country with a constitutional system intact, and the way was still open for democracy to take root.

Yeltsin’s historical legacy would depend in part on the policies and democratic commitments of his successor. Putin’s newfound reputation was based largely on his vigorous prosecution of the war in Chechnya. Yet he knew how to pledge commitment to democracy, pay his respect to the reformers of the 1980s, and hail the protection of private property as one of the “hallmarks of civilization.” To some, however, his proclaimed dedication to a “strong state” aroused concerns, and Putin's governing methods seemed to become more authoritarian over the course of his first term and after he won reelection to the presidency in 2004. Responding in part to the continuing problem of Chechen terrorism (which included shocking terrorist attacks on a large Moscow theater and a public school in a small town), Putin promoted the centralization of state power and suppressed his opponents in the government, in the media, and in elite business circles. In international affairs, Putin sought to shape a more independent and assertive Russian foreign policy, openly opposing American military intervention in Iraq in 2003 and steadily improving relations with China. A gradually strengthening Russian economy enabled Putin to develop a more forceful assertion of Russia’s international interests, but the nation’s future role in the evolving global economy and international political order remained uncertain.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 19 80-2001

               “Solidarity” labor movement leads campaign for reform in Poland
1985           Mikhail Gorbachev assumes leadership of the Soviet Union
1986           Nuclear accident at Chernobyl releases dangerous radioactivity in Ukraine
1987           The United States and Soviet Union agree to remove intermediate-range missiles from Europe
1989           Soviet Union withdraws its military forces from Afghanistan
1989           Berlin Wall is dismantled; Communist regime collapses in East Germany
1989           Communist regimes are dissolved in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Romania
1990           German reunification creates an enlarged Federal Republic of Germany
1991           Boris Yeltsin is elected President of Russia and leads resistance to attempted coup by antireform faction of Communist party
1991-1996      Yugoslavia breaks apart; Serbian and Croatian forces pursue “ethnic cleansings” in Bosnia and Croatia
1992           The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is officially dissolved
1994-1996      Russia wages military campaign against secessionist movement in Chechnya
1999           NATO forces launch air attacks on Serbia to stop Serbian assaults on Muslims in the province of Kosovo
2000           Vladimir Putin succeeds Yeltsin as President of the Russian Federation
2000-2001      Slobodan Milosevic is forced out of power in Serbia and sent to stand trial at the war crimes tribunal in the Hague

Almost two decades after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the old Leninist-Stalinist communism was gone. No one expected Russia to return to a command economy and the rigidities of central planning or to put together the pieces of the old Russian empire of the tsars or the Soviets. Although Putin’s critics complained about growing threats to democratic political institutions, Russia had a constitution, civil rights, freedom of religion, and free, contested elections. That more was not accomplished in Russian economic and political life after the disappearance of the Soviet Union had to be balanced against the seven decades of twentieth-century dictatorship.

The Resurgence of Nationalism: the Breakup of Yugoslavia

Of all the explosive issues that confronted Europe after the downfall of communism in 1989, ethnic nationalism proved the most intractable. Nationalist passions resurfaced after a long period of political suppression during the decades of Communist rule. Czechoslovakia, as we have seen, divided peacefully in 1993 in response to Slovak pressures. But in Yugoslavia, the large multiethnic, multinational federation that had been created at Versailles in 1919, politically ambitious leaders stirred up old national and even religious tensions which tore the state apart and confronted Europe and the international community with violence, armed combat, atrocities, floods of refugees, and civilian suffering not seen in Europe since the Second World War.

What happened in Yugoslavia was deeply rooted in historical animosities that were awakened and exploited for selfish political purposes by nationalist political leaders in the wake of communism’s collapse in eastern Europe. To go back in time, the Balkan peninsula had been conquered by the Ottoman Turks in the fourteenth century. Serbia, once a powerful medieval kingdom attached to the Eastern Orthodox church, fell under Ottoman rule in 1389 and remained under Turkish rule for close to 500 years. In 1878 it broke away from the decaying Ottoman Empire and with the backing of the European Great Powers regained its status as an independent kingdom. Its neighbors Croatia and Slovenia had also been ruled by the Ottomans, but Croatia and Slovenia rejoined the Austrian Habsburg empire in the late seventeenth century and reaffirmed their ties with Roman Catholicism and central Europe. Bosnia (more precisely Bosnia and Herzegovina) long had a mixed population of Serbs, Croats, and Muslims; many Bosnians of Slavic blood in the long years of Turkish rule had adopted Islam. It too was freed from Ottoman rule in 1878 but was taken over by the Habsburg empire.

When both the Austrian and Ottoman empires collapsed at the end of the First World War, Serbia together with other South Slav nationalists in 1918 proclaimed a “Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.” At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 it was permitted also to annex Bosnia, Montenegro (also ethnically Serb), and other formerly Ottoman territories. All were now joined together under the Serb monarchy in a large multinational federation. For many years the nationalities held together in a somewhat uneasy alliance under a kind of royal dictatorship. In 1929 King Alexander in a symbolic effort at achieving greater unity changed the country’s name to Yugoslavia (or South Slav state). Croat separatism remained alive and a Croat nationalist assassinated King Alexander in 1934. Yet many people spoke of themselves as Yugoslavs and regarded Belgrade as their capital, and the outside world accepted a Yugoslav national identity.

During the Second World War, after the Nazis invaded Yugoslavia in 1941, the internal tensions in the Serb-dominated country reemerged. Croatia proclaimed its independence and for a time was governed as a separate Nazi puppet state. A Croat fascist organization, the Ustachi, collaborated with the Nazis in rounding up and brutally mistreating Serbs, Jews, and others. For the country as a whole the Yugoslav military resistance to Hitler turned divisive and eventually evolved into a civil war between the royalist (mostly Serb) army and guerrilla forces (mainly non-Serb) led by the prewar Communist leader Marshal Tito. By his greater effectiveness against the Nazis, Tito won the support of Churchill and Roosevelt and then triumphed in the civil war.

After its wartime ordeal, with some 2 million of its people dead, Yugoslavia emerged in the postwar years under a Communist regime headed by Tito, who soon broke with Moscow. In 1946 he set up a federal republic with six component “republics” (Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia, Montenegro, and Macedonia), along with two “autonomous provinces,” one of which was Kosovo. Although himself a Croat, he suppressed all separatist movements with an iron hand, but allowed each of the republics a degree of autonomy. In Bosnia he recognized the Bosnian Muslims as a distinct “national group” and gave them equal status with the Serbs and Croats. So long as Tito lived, Yugoslavia retained its national unity and identity. It was when he died in 1980 that latent separatist movements reemerged. His successors in the next several years, who had to struggle with a troubled economy also, tried various solutions, including a rotating federal presidency, but with little success. When in 1989 communism collapsed all over eastern Europe, the regime in Yugoslavia collapsed as well. Yugoslavia’s reform Communists (now calling themselves Socialists) relaxed the party’s authoritarian grip on the country, faced up to its nationalities problem, and held open elections on the country’s future. Only Serbia and Montenegro (the two Serb states were always closely allied) voted to maintain the federal republic. Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia, and Bosnia all voted for parties committed to independence.

Former Communist leaders, like Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia and Franjo Tudjman in Croatia, seeing power slip away, placed themselves at the head of nationalist crusades. Milosevic, the Serbian president, rallied Serbs in Bosnia, Croatia, and Slovenia to fight to remain under Serb control whenever secession took place. His fiery speeches and tactics backfired. Alarmed by Serb militancy, Croatia and Slovenia each held a referendum and in 1991 proclaimed its independence. They received immediate recognition from the international community, which was persuaded that prompt recognition would forestall Serb military action.

In Bosnia, the situation was even more complicated. The Serbs and Croats together comprised over half the population, but the Muslims, as the largest single national group, dominated the government; over the opposition of the Serb and Croat representatives, the Muslim nationalist leaders declared Bosnia’s independence. The secession of Croatia, Slovenia, and Bosnia and their immediate international recognition infuriated Milosevic, who now governed the former Yugoslavia as a rump state consisting of only Serbia and Montenegro.

Open warfare broke out in mid-1991. Local Serb paramilitary forces, reinforced by army units from Belgrade, proceeded to carve out enclaves in the secessionist states, where Serbs lived in significant numbers, and to drive out non-Serbs. In the fighting in Croatia and Slovenia Serb forces continued to seize territory until a temporary cease-fire was arranged.

Tudjman meanwhile goaded the Croat nationalists into action. The worst violence occurred when both Serbs and Croats attempted to create enclaves for themselves in Bosnia. For years the mixed population there, despite ethnic and religious differences, had lived peacefully side by side and had even intermarried. In the war that ensued, the Serb military forces brutalized the Muslim population. The barbaric deeds, labeled “ethnic cleansing,” included large-scale expulsions, wholesale civilian slaughter, pillage, and rape. A prolonged siege of Sarajevo took place. At Srebenica in eastern Bosnia Serb militia executed some 8,000 Muslim men and buried them in mass graves. A shocked world could scarcely believe such events were occurring in civilized Europe in the closing decade of the twentieth century.

But the international community could not agree on measures to cope with the situation. United Nations contingents were unable even to deliver food and medical supplies. Given the historical complexity of the Balkans and the memories of earlier ferocious conflicts, neither the European powers, which might have been expected to take the lead, nor the United States would intervene with any meaningful show of force. The Security Council, however, imposed economic sanctions against the former Yugoslavia (which, as we have seen, consisted now of only Serbia and its historical ally, Montenegro), embargoed the shipment of arms, and made plans for war crimes trials at The Hague.

In 1994, to end the siege of Sarajevo, the United Nations, the United States, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) mediated a cease-fire and threatened air strikes if it were violated. For Bosnia a partial diplomatic settlement was negotiated. Croats and Muslims agreed to create a Croat-Muslim federation in what remained of Bosnian territory after the Serb conquests. The Serbs now occupied two-thirds of Bosnia and one-third of Croatia, with no intention of surrendering their gains. By 1994,200,000 people were dead or missing, mostly in the fighting in Bosnia since 1991; there were about 4.4 million displaced persons. And still the fighting went on. In 1995 the Croatian army repulsed the Serb military and recovered most of the territory it had lost to the Serbs four years earlier. The Croats undertook their own “ethnic cleansing” program, expelling over 200,000 Serbs. In Bosnia the Serb offensive failed as well. Finally, in 1996, Serbia agreed to terms mediated by the United States at a meeting in Dayton, Ohio, accepting the new boundaries of Croatia and Bosnia and agreeing that UN peacekeepers would supervise the settlement in Bosnia.

An additional source of trouble soon developed, this time within Serbia itself in its province of Kosovo, where a growing separatist movement alarmed the Serbs. As early as 1989 Milosevic, as part of his initial pro-Serb agitation throughout Yugoslavia, had rescinded the province’s autonomy. Ethnic Albanians, Muslim in religion, had long lived in Kosovo; through immigration from Albania and with large families, they had grown in such numbers that they now made up 90 percent of the population of two million. The Kosovars, as they were known, considered themselves related in religion, language, and culture to fellow Albanians in Albania. The Serbs were especially concerned because they themselves viewed Kosovo as a kind of holy land, where their ancestors had fought and lost the famous battle of Kosovo in 1389 to the Ottoman Turks.

The separatist movement grew at first under moderate leadership, but the Kosovars soon turned to their small but militant liberation army. In 1998 Milosevic launched a military offensive aimed at wiping out the Kosovar forces. Serb military and police units blasted villages and towns to root out the rebels, killing civilian men, women, and children as well. International efforts to mediate failed. In 1998 the United States and NATO, acting not only because of the egregious human rights violations but because of the threat to the stability of the wider Balkan region, warned Milosevic that it would not allow the Serbs to do in Kosovo what they done in Bosnia a few years earlier. Milosevic nonetheless continued the wholesale Serb offensive, with mandates for “ethnic cleansing” that seemed intended to destroy the Kosovars or drive them into exile. By that time over 800,000 Kosovars had been forced to flee; at least 10,000 were dead.

In March 1999 NATO, for the first time in its 50-year history, undertook a military offensive, launching large-scale air attacks against Serbia. The bombing, led by the United States, continued for 78 days with severe damage in Belgrade and elsewhere before Milosevic yielded. It was, to be sure, an attack upon a sovereign European state not charged with external aggression, and it seemed to violate a fundamental principle of national sovereignty. But the egregious abuses by Serbia and the violations of human rights against its own citizens were viewed as illegal, murderous actions that required and justified what President Clinton described as “humanitarian intervention.” New international law was being made. The United States and its European allies were compensating for the failure of the international community to act against the mass killings in Bosnia (and in Rwanda) a few years earlier.

The refusal of the American leadership in the bombing offensive to commit ground troops, as some of its NATO allies urged, or even to announce it as an option, may have prolonged the bombing, but made it easier for the American president to retain political support at home. In the end Milosevic had to yield, but a Russian-backed UN Security Council resolution confirmed Yugoslav sovereignty over Kosovo even if Milosevic had to accept 50,000 armed NATO troops as peacekeepers there.

That summer Kosovars returned under international protection. The UN forces faced the difficult task of relief and reconstruction and of providing security for both Kosovars and Serbs. The indictment of Milosevic as a war criminal by the international court at The Hague and his international isolation added to his unpopularity, but he did not give up power until he unexpectedly lost an election in the fall of 2000 and was forced to resign after massive demonstrations demanded the recognition of his opponent, a respected law professor who had kept aloof from the regime. Vojslav Kostunica took office with broad popular and international support, but he faced enormous economic problems as well as the unsettled future of Kosovo. Under international pressure, Milosevic was handed over in 2001 to the war crimes tribunal to face trial at The Hague, where his trial did not begin until 2005. Meanwhile, the Serbian political situation remained unsettled as die-hard nationalists continued to oppose those who favored closer economic and political relations with western Europe. The twentieth-century name, Yugoslavia, was no longer used after Serbia and Montenegro created a new federation in 2003; and by 2005 a new president was struggling to introduce reforms in the country’s economic and political institutions. Tensions continued in Kosovo, which remained under UN administration.

Central and Eastern Europe after 1989

But we must return to central and eastern Europe, where developments took place more peacefully than in Yugoslavia. Following the revolutionary changes of 1989, Europe was no longer divided into East and West. The former Communist nations were moving toward democracy, the rule of law, and a free economy. But as in Russia, law and government had fallen into disrepute during the more than four decades of Soviet control; crime, corruption, and cynicism toward authority had become a method of survival. The success in open elections of former Communists, who had helped reconstruct their parties under various names and with varying degrees of reform, resulted from the hard times associated with the traumas of transition; but the new reform Communists, it must be said, learned to live and work with the democratic parties. Virtually every country in the former Soviet bloc for a time had either a head of state or head of government who had once been a Communist political leader. Poland in 1993 had its first ex-Communist prime minister and in 1995 an ex-Communist president. Many of the post-Communist societies experienced a repetition of the greed and rapaciousness of early Western capitalism. As in Russia, the former ruling and managerial elites profited personally from the newly privatized state industries, accumulating economic power and wealth.

Some observers judged the “revolution” of 1989 harshly, arguing that despite its significance in overthrowing a failed system and casting off foreign domination, the new regimes were bent mainly on emulating the material successes of the West. The goal of a democratic, civil society to supplement the organized state seemed to have faded. Party politics and party maneuvering became the rule. Because the revolution was peaceful, some speculated, a revolutionary catharsis may have been missing.

Yet there was a partial effort to reckon with the past. The former German Democratic Republic conducted trials and purges and opened the files of the East German secret security police (die Stasi), dramatically revealing wide networks of informers. The Czechs tried to ban men and women accused of serving as informers or collaborators from participation in political life for stipulated time periods, but that led to abuses and was abandoned. The Poles at first sought to draw a “thick line,” as they described it, between past and present, but then they too conducted purges and opened police files. Some said the Europeans might have benefited from “truth commissions,” as in Latin America or South Africa before which past offenders against human rights could come forward to admit their misdeeds without necessarily expecting forgiveness.

Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic took the lead in the transition to democratic freedoms, market economies, the rule of law, and pluralist societies, closely followed by the three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. They all looked forward to admission to the European Union, which would eventually take place in 2004. From 1995 on economies in central and eastern Europe were growing. The most prosperous countries were those that adopted the most drastic economic measures, even though the initial social consequences at the time were painful. Poland was the best example of a country that benefited from such “shock therapy” and from the mid-1990s enjoyed a vigorous expanding economy. Despite persistent problems, the overall economic balance sheets showed progress throughout central and eastern Europe. The revolutionary upheavals of 1989 and their aftermath would long be remembered as the final events in the Cold War of the second half of the twentieth century, which now gave way to the conflicts of a new era.