Chapter 11

INDUSTRIES, IDEAS, AND THE STRUGGLE FOR REFORM, 1815-1848

52. The Industrial Revolution in Britain

53. The Advent of the “Isms”

54. The Dike and the Flood: Domestic

55. The Dike and the Flood: International

56. The Breakthrough of Liberalism in the West: Revolutions of 1830-1832

57. Triumph of the West European Bourgeoisie

In the period of some 30 years preceding 1815 two “revolutions” had been taking place. One was the upheaval associated with the French Revolution and the Napoleonic empire. Basically, it was mainly political, having to do with the organization of government, public power and authority, public finance, taxation, administration, law, individual rights, and the legal position of social classes. The other “revolution,” a revolution in a more metaphorical sense, was primarily economic, having to do with the production of wealth, the techniques of manufacture, the exploitation of natural resources, the development of new technologies, the formation of capital, and the distribution of products to consumers. The political and the economic revolutions in these years went on somewhat independently of each other. Until 1815 the political revolution affected mainly the Continent, while the economic revolution was most active in England. The Continent, while renewing itself politically, remained economically less advanced than England. England, transformed economically, remained conservative in other respects. Hence it has been possible to deal with the political significance of the French Revolution and its Napoleonic sequel without much discussion of the Industrial Revolution, as the economic changes then occurring in England are always called.

It may be (the matter is arguable) that the Industrial Revolution was more important than the French Revolution or any other. In a telescopic view of world history the two biggest changes experienced by the human race in the past 10,000 years may have been the agricultural or Neolithic revolution, which, beginning about 8000 b.c., ushered in the first civilizations, and the Industrial Revolution, which ushered in the modern global civilization of the last two centimes. However that may be, it proves on closer examination that the economic and the political, the Industrial Revolution (or industrialization) and the other institutions of a society, cannot be kept apart in the historical study of modern times. The Industrial Revolution occurred first in England, becoming evident about 1780, because of certain political characteristics of English society, because earlier commercial and naval successes had expanded England’s access to world markets, and because English life offered rewards to the individual for a spirit of risk-taking and innovation. Nor can the effects of political and economic revolution, in England or elsewhere, be kept apart for the years after 1815.

With the defeat of Napoleon and signing of the peace treaty at Vienna in 1815, it seemed that the French Revolution was at last over. European conservatism had triumphed; since it restored European monarchies and frankly opposed the new “French ideas,” it can appropriately be called “reaction.” But the processes of industrialization, as they accelerated in England and spread to the Continent, worked against the politically conservative settlement. Industrialization greatly enlarged both the business and wage-earning classes, and made it harder for monarchs and landed aristocrats to maintain their control over public power. Industrial development in the nineteenth century was often called “progress,” and economic progress proved stronger than political reaction.

Industrial society arose in England, Western Europe, and the United States in the nineteenth century, within the system known as capitalism. In the twentieth century, after the Russian Revolution in 1917, industrial societies were created in which capitalism was vehemently rejected. Industrialism and capitalism are therefore by no means the same. Yet all industrial societies use capital, which is defined as wealth that is not consumed but Is used to produce more wealth, or future wealth. An automobile is a consumer’s good; the automobile factory is the capital. What distinguishes a capitalist from a noncapitalist society is not the existence of capital but the ways in which the capital is controlled. The distinctions sometimes become blurred. In one form of society the control of capital is through private ownership, or institutions of private property, by which capital is owned by individuals, families, or corporations that are in turn owned by shareholders—in any case not by the state. In such societies, though ownership may be widespread, most capital is controlled by relatively few people, responding to market forces. In the other form of society productive capital in principle belongs to the public and is in effect owned and controlled by the state or its agencies; such societies usually call themselves socialist, because the first socialists rejected the principle of private ownership of the means of production, that is, of capital. In these societies the control of capital, or decisions on saving, investment, and production, are also in the hands of relatively few under some form of central plan.

In Europe the institutions of secure private property had developed gradually since the Middle Ages, and much that happened in the French Revolution was designed to protect property from the demands of the state. Possession of property was held to be the basis of personal independence and political liberty, and the expectation of keeping future profits inspired, in some, a willingness to commit their capital to new and uncertain ventures. It made possible an entrepreneurial spirit. There had been a commercial capitalism in Europe at least since the sixteenth century. Industrialization in Europe was therefore capitalist. Countries outside the West-European orbit, and industrializing later, faced a different problem. A country in which little capital had accumulated from the trade and agriculture of previous generations, and which had few owners of capital or enterprising individuals, could hardly industrialize by European methods. If it lacked the European background, in which various political, social, legal, and organizational features were as important as the economic, it would have to achieve industrialization by a combination of other methods. This usually meant that innovation, planning, decision making, control, and even domination rested largely with the state.

In the short run, within a few years, the Industrial Revolution in Western Europe favored the liberal, modernizing principles and legal rights proclaimed in the French Revolution. In the middle run, or in half a century, it made Europe overwhelmingly more powerful than other parts of the world, leading to a worldwide European ascendancy in the form of imperialism. In the still longer run, by the twentieth century, it provoked a retaliation, in which other countries tried hastily to industrialize in self-protection, or to improve the condition of their peoples, hoping to catch up with Western economies and nationstates while loudly denouncing the West as imperialist and capitalist. Of these newer industrial societies the Soviet Union, until its dissolution in 1991, and the People’s Republic of China, from 1949 into the twenty-first century, would be the most prominent.

52. THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN BRITAIN

On the whole, from the beginning of history until about 1800, the work of the world was done with hand tools. Since then it has been increasingly done by machines. Before about 1800 power was supplied by human or animal muscle, reinforced by levers or pulleys, and supplemented by the force of running water or moving air. Since then power has been supplied by the human manipulation of forms of energy found in steam, electricity, the combustion of gases, and most recently within the atom. The process of shifting from hand tools to power machinery is what is meant by the Industrial Revolution. Its beginning cannot be dated exactly. It grew gradually out of the technical practices of earlier times. It is still going on, for in some countries industrialization has barely begun, and even in the most highly developed it is still making advances. But the first country to be profoundly affected by industrialization was Great Britain, where its effects became manifest in the half-century following 1780.

It seems likely, despite the emphasis placed on revolutionary upheavals by historians, that people are habitually quite conservative. Working people do not put off their old way of life, move to strange and overcrowded towns, or enter the deadly rounds of mine and factory except under strong incentive. Well-to-do people, living in comfort on assured incomes, do not readily risk their wealth in new and untried ventures. The shifting to modern machine production requires in any country a certain mobility of people and of wealth. Such mobility may be produced by state pressure, as in the twentieth-century industrialization of the Soviet Union or the People’s Republic of China. In eighteenth-century England a high degree of social mobility developed from a long historical process of social change.

The Agricultural Revolution in Britain

The English Revolution of 1688, confirming the ascendancy of Parliament over the king, meant in economic terms the ascendancy of the more well-to-do property-owning classes. Among these the landowners were by far the most important, though they counted the great London merchants among their allies. For a century and a half, from 1688 to 1832, the British government was substantially in the hands of these landowners—the “squirearchy” or “gentlemen of England.” The result was a thorough transformation of farming, an Agricultural Revolution without which the Industrial Revolution could not have occurred.

Many landowners, seeking to increase their money incomes, began experimenting with improved methods of cultivation and stock raising. They made more use of fertilizers such as animal manure; they introduced new implements such as the drill seeder and horse-hoe; they brought in new crops, such as turnips, and a more scientific system of crop rotation; they attempted to breed larger sheep and fatter cattle. An improving landlord, to introduce such changes successfully, needed full control over his land. He saw only a barrier to progress in the old village system of open fields, common lands, and semicollective methods of cultivation. Improvement also required an investment of capital, which was impossible so long as the soil was tilled by numerous poor and custom-bound small farmers.

The old common rights of the villagers were part of the English common law. Only an act of Parliament could modify or extinguish them. It was the great landowners who controlled Parliament, which therefore passed hundreds of “enclosure acts,” authorizing the enclosure, by fences, walls, or hedges, of the old common lands and unfenced open fields. Land thus came under a strict regime of private ownership and individual management. At the same time small owners sold out or were excluded in various ways, the more easily since the larger owners had so much local authority as justices of the peace. Ownership of land in England, more than anywhere else in central or western Europe, became concentrated in the hands of a relatively small class of wealthy landlords, who leased it out in large blocks to a relatively small class of substantial fanners. This development, though in progress throughout the eighteenth century, reached its height during the Napoleonic wars.

One result was greatly to raise the productivity of land and of farm labor. Fatter cattle yielded more meat; more assiduous cultivation yielded more cereals. The food supply of England was increased, while a smaller percentage of the population was needed to produce it. Labor was thus released for other pursuits. The greater number of the English country people became wage earners, working for the farmers and landlords, or spinning or weaving in their cottages for merchants in the towns. English working men and women were therefore dependent on daily wages long before the coming of the factory and the machine. Working people became mobile; they would go where the jobs were, or where the wages were slightly higher. They also became available for new kinds of work because fewer of them were needed on the land to produce food. Such conditions hardly obtained except in Great Britain. On the Continent agricultural methods were less productive, and the rural workers were more established on the soil, whether by institutions of serfdom as in eastern Europe or by the possession of property or firm leaseholds as in France.

Industrialism in Britain: Incentives and Inventions

Meanwhile, as the Agricultural Revolution ran its course in the eighteenth century and into the nineteenth, the British had conquered a colonial empire, staked out markets all over the Americas and Europe, built up a huge mercantile marine, and won command of the sea. The British merchant could sell more, if only more could be produced. He had the customers, he had the ships, and moreover he could obtain the capital with which to finance new ideas. The profit motive prompted the search for more rapid methods of production. The old English staple export, woolen cloth, could be marketed indefinitely if only more could be woven. The possibilities in cotton cloth were enormous. The taste of Europeans for cottons had been already formed by imports from Asia. Using hand methods, Europeans could not produce cotton cloth in competition with the East. But the market was endless if cotton could be spun, woven, and printed with less labor, that is, by machines. Capital was available, mobile, and fluid because of the rise of banking, credit, and stock companies. Funds could be shifted from one enterprise to another. Wealthy landowners and merchants could divert some of their profits to industry. If an invention proved a total loss, as sometimes happened, or if it required years of development before producing any income, the investment could still be afforded. Only a country already wealthy from commerce and agriculture could have been the first to initiate the machine age. England was such a country.

These conditions induced a series of successful inventions in the textile industry. In 1733 a man named John Kay invented the fly shuttle, by which only one person instead of two was needed to weave cloth on a loom. The resulting increase in the output of weaving set up a strong demand for yam. This was met in the 1760s by the invention of the spinning jenny, a kind of mechanized spinning wheel that enabled workers to increase their production of yam. The new shuttles and jennies were first operated by hand and used by domestic workers in their homes. But in 1769 Richard Arkwright patented the water frame, a device for the multiple spinning of many threads. At first it was operated by water power, but in the 1780s Arkwright introduced the steam engine to drive his spinning machinery. Requiring a considerable installation of heavy equipment, he gathered his engines, frames, and workers into large and usually dismal buildings, called mills by the English, or factories in subsequent American usage. Mechanical spinning now for a time overwhelmed the hand weavers with yam. This led to the development of the power loom, which became economically practicable shortly after 1800. Weaving as well as spinning therefore took place increasingly in factories. These improvements in the finishing process put a heavy strain on the production of raw cotton. An ingenious Connecticut inventor, Eli Whitney, while employed as a children’s tutor on a Georgia plantation in 1793, produced a cotton gin, which by speeding up the removal of seeds greatly increased the output of cotton. The gin soon spread through the American South, where the almost decaying plantation, economy was abruptly revived, becoming an adjunct to the Industrial Revolution in England British imports of raw cotton multiplied fivefold in the 30 years following 1790. In value of manufactures, cotton cloth rose from ninth to first place among British industries in the same years. By 1820 it made up almost half of all British exports.

The steam engine, applied to the cotton mills in the 1780s, had for a century been going through a development of its own. Scientific and technical experiments with steam pressures had been fairly common in the seventeenth century, but what gave the economic impetus to invention was the gradual dwindling of Europe’s primeval stocks of timber. The wood shortage became acute in England about 1700, so that it was more difficult to obtain the charcoal needed in smelting iron, and smelters turned increasingly to coal. Deeper coal shafts could not be sunk until someone devised better methods of pumping out water. About 1702 Thomas Newcomen built the first economically significant steam engine, which was soon widely used to drive pumps in the coal mines. However, it consumed so much fuel in proportion to power delivered that it could generally be used only in the coal fields themselves. In 1763 James Watt, a technician at the University of Glasgow, began to make improvements on Newcomen’s engine. He formed a business partnership with Matthew Boulton. Boulton, originally a manufacturer of toys, buttons, and shoe buckles, provided the funds to finance Watt’s rather costly experiments, handmade equipment, and slowly germinating ideas. By the 1780s the firm of Boulton and Watt was eminently successful, manufacturing steam engines both for British use and for the export trade.

At first, until further refinements and greater precision could be obtained in the working of iron, the engines were so cumbersome that they could be used as stationary engines only, as in the new spinning mills of Arkwright and others. Soon after 1800 the steam engine was successfully used to propel river boats, notably on the Hudson River in 1807, by Robert Fulton, who employed an imported Boulton and Watt engine. Experiments with steam power for land transportation began at the same time. Just as Newcomen’s engine had been put to practical uses in the coal fields of England a century before, so now it was in the coal fields that Watt’s engine first became a locomotive. Well before 1800 the mines had taken to using railways, on which wagons with flanged wheels, drawn by horses, carried coal to canals or to the sea. In the 1820s steam engines were successfully placed on moving vehicles. The first fully satisfactory locomotive was George Stephenson’s Rocket, which in 1829, on the newly built Liverpool and Manchester Railway, not only reached an impressive speed of 16 miles per hour but met more important safety tests as well. By the 1840s the era of railroad construction was under way in both Europe and the United States.

The Industrial Revolution in Great Britain in its early phase, down to 1830 or 1840, took place principally in the manufacture of textiles, with accompanying developments in the exploitation of iron and coal. The early factories were principally textile factories, and indeed mainly cotton mills; for cotton was an entirely new industry to Europe and hence easily mechanized, whereas the long established woolen trade, in which both employers and workers hesitated to abandon their customary ways, was mechanized more slowly. The suddenness of the change must not be exaggerated. It is often said that the Industrial Revolution was not a revolution at all. As late as the 1830s only a small fraction of the British working people were employed in factories. But the factory and the factory system were even then regarded as the coming mode of production, destined to grow and expand and symbolize the irresistible march of progress.

Some Social Consequences of Industrialism in Britain

The Britain that emerged fundamentally unscathed and in fact strengthened from the wars with Napoleon was no longer the “merrie England” of days of yore. The island was becoming crowded with people, as was the lesser island of Ireland. The combined population of Great Britain and Ireland tripled in the century from 1750 to 1850, rising from about 10 million in 1750 to about 30 million in 1850. The growth was distributed very unevenly. Formerly, in England, most people had lived in the south. But the coal and iron, and hence the steam power, lay in the Midlands and the north. Here whole new cities rose seemingly out of nowhere. In 1785 it was estimated that in England and Scotland, outside of London, there were only three cities with more than 50,000 people. Seventy years later, the span of one lifetime, there were 31 British cities of this size. 

Preeminent among them was Manchester in Lancashire, the first and most famous of the new industrial cities. Manchester, before the coming of the cotton mills, was a rather large market town. Though very ancient, it had not been significant enough to be recognized as a borough for representation in Parliament. Locally it was organized as a manor. Not until 1845 did the inhabitants extinguish the manorial rights, buying them out at that time from the last lord. In population Manchester grew from 25,000 in 1772 to 455,000 in 1851. But until 1835 there was no regular procedure in England for the incorporation of cities. Urban organization was more backward than in Prussia or France. Unless inherited from the Middle Ages, a city had no legal existence. It lacked proper officials and adequate tax-raising and lawmaking powers. It was therefore difficult for Manchester and the other new factory towns to deal with problems of rapid urbanization, such as provision for police protection, water and sewers, or the disposal of garbage.

The new urban agglomerations were drab places, blackened with the heavy soot of the early coal age, settling alike on the mills and the workers’ quarters, which were dark at best, for the climate of the Midlands is not sunny. Housing for workers was hastily built, closely packed, and always in short supply, as in all rapidly growing communities. Entire families lived in single rooms, and family life tended to disintegrate. A police officer in Glasgow observed that there were whole blocks of tenements in the city, each swarming with a thousand ragged children who had first names only, usually nicknames—like animals, as he put it.

The distressing feature of the new factories was that for the most part they required unskilled labor only. Skilled workers found themselves degraded in status.

Hand weavers and spinners, thrown out of work by the new machines, either languished in a misery that was the deepest of that of any class in the Industrial Revolution or else went off to a factory to find a job. The factories paid good wages by the standards for unskilled labor at the time. But these standards were very low, too low to allow a man to support his wife and children. This had generally been true for unskilled labor, in England and elsewhere, under earlier economic systems also. In the new factories the work was so mechanical that children as young as six years old were often preferred. Women, too, worked for less and were often more adept at handling a bobbin, which brought many women spinners from the older, displaced “cottage industries” into the new industrial working class.

Hours in the factories were long, 14 a day or occasionally more; and though such hours were familiar to persons who had worked on farms, or at domestic industry in rural households, they became more tedious and oppressive in the more regimented conditions that were necessary in the mills. Holidays were few, except for the unwelcome leisure of unemployment, which was a common scourge, because the short-run ups and downs of business were very erratic. A day without work produced nothing to live on, but even where the daily wage was relatively attractive, the worker’s real income was chronically insufficient. Workers in the factories, as in the mines, were almost entirely unorganized. They were a mass of recently assembled humanity without traditions or common ties. They bargained individually with their employers who, usually small business people themselves, faced ferocious competition with others. The employers were often in debt for the equipment in their own factories, or they were determined to save money in order to purchase more, and so held their wages bill to the lowest possible figure.

The factory owners, the new “cotton lords,” were the first industrial capitalists. They were often self-made men, who owed their position to their own intelligence, persistence, and foresight. They lived in comfort without ostentation or luxury, saving from each year’s income to build up their factories and their machines. Hard-working themselves, they thought that landed gentlemen were usually idlers and that the poor tended to be lazy. They were usually honest, in a hard and exacting way; they would make money by any means the law allowed, but not beyond it. They were neither brutal nor knowingly hard-hearted. They gave to charitable and philanthropic causes. They believed that they did the poor a favor by furnishing them with work and by seeing to it that they worked diligently and productively. Most of them disapproved of public regulation of their business, though a few, driven by competition to expedients that they did not like, such as the employment of small children, would have accepted some regulation that fell on all competitors equally. It was a cotton magnate, the elder Robert Peel, who in 1802 pushed the first Factory Act through Parliament. This act purported to regulate the conditions in which pauper children were employed in the textile mills, but it was a dead letter from the beginning, since it provided no adequate body of factory inspectors. The English at this time, alone among the leading European peoples, had no class of trained, paid, and professional government administrators; nor did they yet want such a class, preferring self-government and local initiative. To have inspectors for one’s affairs smacked of Continental bureaucracy. The fact that the older methods of economic regulation were obsolescent, actually unsuited to the new age, had the effect of discrediting the idea of regulation itself. The new industrialists wanted to be left alone. They considered it unnatural to interfere with business and believed that, if allowed to follow their own judgment, they would assure the future prosperity and progress of the country.

Classical Economics: "Laissez-Faire"

The industrialists were strengthened in these beliefs by the emerging science of political economy. In 1776 Adam Smith published his epochal Wealth of Nations, which criticized the older mercantilism, with its regulatory and monopolistic practices, and urged, though with moderation, that certain “natural laws” of production and exchange be allowed to work freely in economic markets. Smith was followed by Thomas R. Malthus, David Ricardo, and the so-called Manchester School. Their doctrine was dubbed (by its opponents) laissez-faire and in its elaborated form is still called classical economics. It held, basically, that there is a world of economic relationships autonomous and separable from government or politics. It is the world of the free market and is regulated within itself by certain “natural laws,” such as the law of supply and demand. All persons should follow their own enlightened self-interest; all know their own interests better than anyone else; and the sum total of individual interests will add up to the general welfare and liberty of all. Government should do as little as possible; it should confine itself to preserving security of life and property, providing reasonable laws and reliable courts, thus ensuring the discharge of private contracts, debts, and obligations. Not only business but education, charity, and personal matters generally should be left to private initiative. There should be no tariffs; free trade should reign everywhere, for the economic system is worldwide, unaffected by political barriers or national differences. As for workers, according to classical economists before about 1850, they should not expect to make more than a bare minimum living; an “iron law of wages,” they argued, shows that as soon as workers receive more than a subsistence wage they breed more children, who eat up the excess, so that they reduce themselves, and the working class generally, again to a subsistence level. Workers, if discontented, should see the folly of changing the system, for this is the system, the natural system—there is no other. Political economy as taught in grim Manchester was not without reason called the “dismal science.”

For working people in England the Industrial Revolution was a hard experience. It should be remembered, however, that neither low wages, nor the 14-hour day, nor the labor of women and children, nor the ravages of unemployment were anything new. All had existed for centuries, in England and western Europe, as agricultural and commercial capitalism replaced the more self-sufficient economies of the Middle Ages. The factory towns were in some ways better places than the rural slums from which many of their people came. Factory routine was psychologically deadening, but the textile mills were not always worse than the domestic sweatshops in which manufacturing processes had previously been carried on. The concentration of working people in city and factory opened the way to improvement in their condition. It made their misery apparent; philanthropic sentiment gradually arose among the more fortunate. Gathered in cities, workers obtained more knowledge of the world. Mingling and talking together, they developed a sense of solidarity, class interest, and common political aims; and in time they became organized, establishing labor unions by which to obtain a larger share of the national income.

Britain after the fall of Napoleon became the workshop of the world. Though factories using steam power sprang up in France, Belgium, New England, and elsewhere, it was really not until after 1870 that Great Britain faced major industrial competition from abroad. The British had a virtual monopoly in textiles and machine tools. The English Midlands and Scottish Lowlands shipped cotton thread and steam engines to all the world. British capital was exported to all countries, there to call new enterprises into being. London became the world’s clearinghouse and financial center. Progressive people in other lands looked to Britain as their model, hoping to learn from its advanced industrial methods, and to imitate its parliamentary political system.

53. THE ADVENT OF THE "ISMS"

The combined forces of industrialization and of the French Revolution led after 1815 to a proliferation of new doctrines and movements, most of which contributed to a general European revolution in 1848. As for the 33 years from 1815 to 1848, there is no better way of grasping their long-run meaning than to reflect on the number of enduring “isms” that arose at that time.

So far as is known the word “liberalism” first appeared in the English language in 1819, “radicalism” in 1820, “socialism” in 1832, “conservatism” in 1835. The 1830s first saw “individualism,” “constitutionalism,” “humanitarianism,” “feminism,” and “monarchism.” “Nationalism” and “communism” date from the 1840s. Not until the 1850s did the English-speaking world use the word “capitalism” (French capitalisme is much older); and not until even later had it heard of “Marxism,” though the doctrines of Marx grew out of and reflected the troubled times of the 1840s.

The rapid coinage of new “isms” does not in every case mean that the ideas they conveyed were new. Many of them had their origin in the Enlightenment, if not before. People had loved liberty before talking of liberalism and been conservative without defining their ideas as conservatism. The appearance of so many “isms” shows rather that people were making their ideas more systematic. To the “philosophy” of the Enlightenment were now added an intense activism and partisanship generated during the French Revolution. People were obliged to reconsider and analyze society as a whole. The social sciences were taking form. An “ism” (excluding such words as “hypnotism” or “favoritism”) may be defined as the conscious espousal of a doctrine in competition with other doctrines. Without the “isms” created in the 30-odd years after the peace of Vienna it is impossible to understand or even talk about the history of the world since that event, so that a brief characterization of some of the most important is in order.

Romanticism

One of the “isms” was not political. It was called “romanticism,” a word first used in English in the 1840s to describe a movement then half a century old. Romanticism was primarily a theory of literature and the arts. Its great exponents included William Wordsworth, Lord Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley in England; Victor Hugo, René Chateaubriand, and George Sand in France; and Friedrich von Schiller, Friedrich Schlegel, and many others in Germany. As a theory of art it raised basic questions on the nature of significant truth, on the importance of various human faculties, on the relation of thought and feeling, on the meaning of the past and of time itself. Romanticism rejected the emphasis on classical rules and rational order that had shaped aesthetic theory during much of the eighteenth century. Romantics celebrated the idiosyncratic visions of creative individuals rather than the symmetries of classical art and literature. They helped produce the modern image of defiant artistic rebels. Representing a new way of sensing all human experience, romanticism affected much thinking on social and public questions.

Possibly the most fundamental romantic attitude was a love of the unclassifiable—of moods or impressions, scenes or stories, sights or sounds or things concretely experienced, personal idiosyncrasies or peculiar customs which the intellect could never classify, box up, explain away, or reduce to an abstract generalization. The romantics, characteristically, insisted on the value of feeling as well as of reason. They were aware of the importance of the subconscious. They were likely to suspect a perfectly lucid idea as somehow superficial. They loved the mysterious, the unknown, the half-seen figures on the far horizon. Hence romanticism contributed to a new interest in strange and distant societies and in strange and distant historical epochs. Where the philosophes of the Enlightenment had deplored the Middle Ages as a time of intellectual error, the romantic generation looked back upon them with respect and even nostalgia, finding in them a fascination, a colorfulness, or a spiritual depth which they missed in their own time. The “Gothic,” which rationalists thought barbarous, had a strong appeal for romantics. A Gothic Revival emerged in the arts, of which one example was the British Parliament buildings, built in the 1830s.

In medieval art and institutions, as in the art and institutions of every age and people, the romantics saw the expression of an inner genius. The idea of original or creative genius was in fact another of the most fundamental romantic beliefs. A genius was a dynamic spirit that no rules could hem in, one that no analysis or classification could ever fully explain. Genius, it was thought, made its own rules and laws. The genius might be that of the individual person, such as the artist, writer, or Napoleonic mover of the world. It might be the genius or spirit of an age. Or it might be the genius of a people or nation, the Volksgeist of Herder, an inherent national character making each people grow in its own distinctive way, which could be known only by a study of its history; romanticism thus merged in many places with new forms of nationalism. Here again romanticism gave a new impetus to study of the past. Politically, romantics could be found in all camps, conservative, liberal, and radical, but the emphasis on individual creativity led most romantics toward a critical view of rigid social and cultural hierarchies. Romanticism thus added cultural and emotional passions to the more political “isms” that evolved rapidly after 1815.

Classical Liberalism

The first Liberals, calling themselves by that name (though Napoleon used that word for his own system), arose in Spain among opponents of the Napoleonic occupation. The word passed to France, where it denoted opposition to royalism after the restoration of the Bourbons in 1814 and where it gained intellectual influence through the work of liberal writers such as Benjamin Constant. In England, many Whigs became increasingly liberal, as did even a few Tories. Liberal political theorists also had influence in England, most notably in the writings of John Stuart Mill, and a new Liberal Party became an important force in British politics during the 1850s. Nineteenth-century, or “classical,” liberalism varied from country to country, but it showed many basic similarities, including an emphasis on the rights and liberties that individuals should possess in every well-ordered, modern society.

Liberals were generally persons of the business and professional classes, together with enterprising landowners wishing to improve their estates. They believed in what was modern, enlightened, efficient, reasonable, and fair. They had confidence in the human capacity for self-government and self-control.

They set a high value on parliamentary or representative government, working through reasonable discussion and legislation, with responsible ministries and an impartial and law-abiding administration. They demanded full publicity for all actions of government, and to ensure such publicity they insisted on freedom of the press and free rights of assembly. All these political advantages they thought most likely to be realized under a good constitutional monarchy. Outside England they favored explicit written constitutions. They were not democrats; they generally opposed giving every man the vote, fearing the excesses of mob rule or of irrational political action. Only as the nineteenth century progressed did liberals gradually and reluctantly come to accept the idea of universal male suffrage. Many continued to oppose female suffrage, though some liberals such as John Stuart Mill argued that women should have the same voting rights as men. Liberals

subscribed to the doctrines of the “rights of man” as set forth in the American and French revolutions, but with a clear emphasis on the right of property, and in their economic views they typically followed the British Manchester School or the French economist J. B. Say. They favored laissez-faire, were suspicious of the ability of government to regulate business, wanted to get rid of the guild system where it still existed, and disapproved of attempts on the part of the new industrial laborers to organize unions.

Internationally they advocated freedom of trade, to be accomplished by the lowering or abolition of tariffs, so that all countries might exchange their products easily with each other and with industrial England. In this way, they thought, each country would produce what it was most fitted for, and so best increase its wealth and standards of living. From the growth of wealth, production, invention, and scientific progress they believed that the general progress of humanity would ensue. They generally frowned upon the established churches and landed aristocracies as obstacles to advancement. They believed in the spread of tolerance and education. They were also profoundly civilian in attitude, disliking wars, conquerors, army officers, standing armies, and military expenditures. They wanted orderly change by processes of legislation. They shrank before the idea of revolution. Liberals on the Continent usually admired Great Britain.

Radicalism, Republicanism, Socialism

Radicalism, at least as a word, originated in England, where about 1820 the Philosophical Radicals proudly applied the term to themselves. These Radicals in the 1820s included not only the few working-class leaders who were beginning to emerge but also many of the new industrial capitalists, who were still unrepresented in Parliament. They took up where such English “Jacobins” as Thomas Paine had left off a generation earlier, before the long crisis of the French wars had discredited all radicalism as pro-French; and they wanted to extend many of the liberal arguments for individual rights to much wider segments of the population.

The Philosophical Radicals were a good deal like the rationalist French philosophes before the Revolution. They were followers of an elderly sage, Jeremy Bentham, who in prolific writings from 1776 to 1832 undertook to reform the English criminal and civil law, church, Parliament, and constitution. The English Radicals professed to deduce the right form of institutions from the fundamental traits of human nature and psychology. They impatiently waved aside all arguments based on history, usage, or custom. They went to the roots of things. (“Radical” is from the Latin word for “root”) They wanted a total reconstruction of laws, courts, prisons, poor relief, municipal organization, rotten boroughs, and fox-hunting clergy. Their demand for the reform of Parliament was vehement and insistent. They detested the Church of England, the peerage, and the squirearchy. Many radicals would just as soon abolish royalty also; not until the long reign of Queen Victoria (1837-1901) did the British monarchy become undeniably popular in all quarters. Above all, radicalism was democratic; it demanded a vote for every adult Englishman. After the Reform Bill of 1832 the industrial capitalists generally turned into liberals, but the working-class leaders remained radical democrats, as will be seen.

On the Continent radicalism was represented by militant republicanism. The years of the First French Republic, which to liberals and conservatives signified horrors associated with the Reign of Terror, were for the republicans years of hope and progress, cut short by forces of reaction. Republicans were a minority even in France; elsewhere, as in Italy and Germany, they were fewer still, though they existed. Mostly the republicans were drawn from intelligentsia such as students and writers, from working-class leaders protesting social injustice, and from elderly veterans, or the descendants of veterans, to whom the Republic of ’93, with its wars and its glory, was a living thing. Because of police repression, republicans often joined together in secret societies. They looked with equanimity on the prospect of further revolutionary upheaval, by which they felt that the cause of liberty, equality, and fraternity would be advanced. Strong believers in political equality, they were democrats demanding universal male suffrage. They favored parliamentary government but were much less primarily concerned with its successful operation than were the liberals. Most republicans were bitterly anticlerical. Remembering the internecine struggle between the church and the republic during the French Revolution, and still facing the political influence of the Catholic clergy (for republicanism was most common in Catholic countries), they regarded the Catholic church as the implacable enemy of reason and liberty. Opposed to monarchy of any kind, even to constitutional monarchy, intensely hostile to church and aristocracy, conscious heirs of the great French Revolution, organized in national and international secret societies, not averse to overthrowing existing regimes by force, the more militant republicans were considered by most other people, including the liberals, to be little better than anarchists.

Republicanism shaded off into socialism. Socialists generally shared the political attitudes of republicanism but added other views besides. The early socialists, those before the Revolution of 1848, were of many kinds, but all had certain ideas in common. All of them regarded the existing economic system as aimless, chaotic, and outrageously unjust. All thought it improper for owners of wealth to have so much economic power—to give or deny work to the worker, to set wages and hours in their own interests, to guide all the labors of society in the interests of private profit. All therefore questioned the value of private enterprise, favoring some degree of communal ownership of productive assets—banks, factories, machines, land, and transportation. All disliked competition as a governing economic or social principle and set forth principles of harmony, cooperation or association instead. All flatly and absolutely rejected the laissez-faire of the liberals and the political economists. Where the latter thought mainly of increasing production, without much concern over distribution, the early socialists thought mainly of a fairer or more equal distribution of income among all useful members of society. They believed that beyond the civil and legal equality brought by the French Revolution a further step toward social and economic equality had yet to be taken.

One of the first socialists was also one of the first cotton lords, Robert Owen (1771— 1858) of Manchester and the Scottish Lowlands. Appalled at the condition of the mill-hands, he created a kind of model community for his own employees, paying high wages, reducing hours, sternly correcting vice and drunkenness, building schools and housing and company stores for the cheap sale of workers’ necessities. From such paternalistic capitalism in his early years he passed on to a long lifetime spent in crusading for social reforms, in which he was somewhat handicapped, not only by the opposition of industrialists, but also by his unpopular radicalism in matters of religion.

Most of the early socialists were French, spurred onward by the sense of an uncompleted revolution. One was a nobleman, the Count de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), who had fought in the War of American Independence, accepted the French Revolution, and in his later years wrote many books on social problems. He and his followers, who called themselves not socialists but Saint-Simonians, were among the first clear exponents of a planned society. They advocated the public ownership of industrial equipment and other capital, with control vested in the hands of great captains of industry or social engineers, who should plan vast projects like the digging of a canal at Suez, and in general coordinate the labor and resources of society to productive ends. Of a different type was Charles Fourier (1772-1837), a somewhat doctrinaire thinker who subjected all social institutions to a sweeping condemnation. His positive program took the form of proposing that society be organized in small units which he termed “phalansteries.” Each of these he conceived to contain 1,620 persons, each doing the work suited to his or her natural inclination. Among the practical French no phalanstery was ever successfully organized. A number were established in the United States, still the land of Europe’s utopian dream; the best known, since it was operated by literary people, was the Brook Farm “movement” in Massachusetts, which ran through a troubled existence of five years from 1842 to 1847. Robert Owen also, in 1825, had founded an experimental colony in America, at New Harmony, Indiana, on the then remote and unspoiled banks of the Wabash; it, too, lasted only about five years. Such schemes, as their critics pointed out, presupposed the withdrawal of select spirits to live by themselves and really had little to say about the problems of society as a whole in an industrial age.

Politically the most significant form of socialism before 1848 was the movement stirring among the working classes of France, a compound of revolutionary republicanism and socialism. The politically minded Paris workers had been republican since 1792. For them the Revolution, in the 1820s, 1830s, 1840s, was not finished but only momentarily interrupted.

Reduced to political impotence, discriminated against in the law courts, obliged to carry identity papers signed by their employers, and goaded by the pressures of industrialization as new factories spread across France, they developed a deep hostility to the owning classes of the bourgeoisie. They found a spokesman in the Paris journalist Louis Blanc, editor of the Revue de progris and author of the Organization of Work (1839), one of the most constructive of the early socialist writings. He proposed a system of “social workshops,” or state-supported manufacturing centers, in which the workers should labor by and for themselves without the intervention of private capitalists. Of this kind of socialism we shall hear more.

As for “communism,” it was at this time an uncertain synonym for socialism. A small group of German revolutionaries, mainly exiles in France, took the name for themselves in the L840s. They would have been historically forgotten had they not included Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels among their members. Marx and Engels consciously used the word in 1848 to differentiate their variety of socialism from that of such Utopians as Saint-Simon, Fourier, and Owen. But the word communism went out of general use after 1848, to be revived after the Russian Revolution of 1917, at which time it received a somewhat new meaning.

Feminism

Feminism emerged as a new political and cultural movement in the early nineteenth century, though the term itself did not appear until some women in France began to refer to themselves as “feminists” during the 1830s. There were several strands of feminism, as there were several strands of all significant “isms,” but most feminists shared various ideas with liberals, radicals, or socialists. Feminism sought to expand the rights of women in both public and private life. Drawing on the legacy of the French Revolution and its conceptions of human rights, feminists argued that the “rights of man” existed also for women (much as republicans and socialists claimed that such rights must also exist for poor people and workers). Some feminists, extending the arguments of Mary Wollstonecraft’s influential book, A Vindication of the Rights of Women (1792), worked mainly to secure new voting and civil rights for women. Other feminists, though they might also support the quest for voting rights, worked mainly to reform the laws that regulated family life or to advance the rights of women in education, cultural life, and the economy. Both of these tendencies in early nineteenth-century feminism drew on Enlightenment ideas about human rights, reform, education, and progress, so that feminism resembled republicanism, radicalism, and socialism in its links to eighteenth-century predecessors, including French writers such as Condorcet and Olympe de Gouges.

The writers and activists who sought new political rights for women tended to be “egalitarian” feminists; that is, they stressed the ways in which women and men shared the use of reason and universal human rights. Despite the obvious connection to themes of the French Revolution, the campaign for women’s political rights developed more rapidly in early nineteenth-century England and America. These national differences may have reflected the fact that voting rights generally became more widespread in England and America in the decades before 1848; or the different feminisms may have developed because French republicanism had become hostile to female political activities during the later stages of the French Revolution, and because the Napoleonic Code had given French women a subordinate position in the patriarchical legal system that regulated family relations. In any case, French feminists in the nineteenth century tended to focus on the social, cultural, or legal rights of women rather than on campaigns to win the vote.

The first nineteenth-century advocates for women’s rights in England were Philosophical Radicals and followers of the socialist leader Robert Owen. The socialists Anne Wheeler and William Thompson, for example, published an important statement of the new feminist themes in their Appeal on Behalf of Women (1825), which traced the inferior status of women to flaws in the economic system. Similar arguments appeared also in the writings of Owen himself and in the publications of his feminist friend, the Scottish writer Frances Wright. But the most influential English argument for women’s political rights emerged in the works of the liberal writers Harriet Taylor and John Stuart Mill, who worked together as close intellectual partners for more than 20 years (they ultimately married after the death of her husband). Beginning in the 1830s, Taylor and Mill produced important works on the social, legal, and political inequalities that women faced in even the most advanced modern societies. Their collaboration led finally to Mill’s famous book, The Subjection of Women (1869), in which Mill referred to the decisive influence of Taylor’s ideas, though she had died before its publication. Mill built his case for women’s political and social rights on the claim that women were inherently equal to men (hence entitled to the same rights) and on the utilitarian argument that society could only benefit from the increased participation of women in public life. Translated into all the major European languages, his book had much subsequent influence on feminist campaigns for the political and legal rights of women in other nations as well as in England. Meanwhile, American women launched their own campaign for voting rights at a convention in Seneca Falls, New York, where leaders such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton declared, in 1848, that women were entitled to vote because they were “created equal” with men.

Feminists also entered public life on the Continent during the 1830s and 1840s, especially in France. Socialists such as Saint-Simon and Fourier gave critical attention to the history of the family, thereby encouraging their followers to develop a social analysis of traditional restrictions on the rights of women. Women activists in the Saint-Simonian groups of the 1830s established journals whose titles asserted new feminist identities: The Free Woman and The New Woman. A new generation of women writers also began to extend the earlier work of Germaine de Stael, who had argued that “it is useful to society’s enlightenment and happiness that women should carefully develop their intelligence and their reason.” All feminists advocated better education for young women, reforms in property and divorce laws to enhance women’s independence, and the right of women to participate in public debates. Many feminists in France, however, moved away from the egalitarian arguments for women’s rights by stressing certain differences between men and women. The special responsibilities of motherhood, for example, gave women a distinctive, essential task in educating the rising generation, but only well-educated, competent women could raise intelligent, well-educated children. Feminists thus strongly supported the creation of new schools for girls and began seeking women’s access to higher education (public secondary schools for girls were not established in France until the 1880s).

In addition to the campaigns for education and legal reforms, many feminists became writers in order to describe the social lives of women or to assert their claims for a place in public life. The travel writings of Flora Tristan, for instance, examined the social constraints that women faced in both South America and Europe. Another French writer of Tristan’s generation, George Sand, became the most influential literary woman of the 1840s. Her many novels and essays often portrayed independent women, but her own life was almost as famous and controversial as her books. Critics mocked her for wearing male clothing, smoking cigars, and living with men outside marriage; yet Sand also won the admiring support of readers throughout Europe, many of whom saw her as a model for new forms of female cultural and political expression. She therefore became a famous symbol for both supporters and enemies of the new feminism; indeed, the term “George Sandism” was used to condemn women whose behavior seemed radical or unconventional. Such hostility indicates how feminism had become one of the postrevolutionary “isms,” though the political campaign for women’s voting rights and other legal reforms would not achieve its main objectives until the twentieth century.

Nationalism: Western Europe

Nationalism first arose in many places as part of the general reaction against the international Napoleonic system, but it also drew its strength from specific cultural and political traditions in each country. It was the most pervasive and the least crystallized of the new “isms,” in part because it usually overlapped with various forms of romanticism, republicanism, or liberalism. In western Europe—Britain, France, or Spain—where national unity already existed, nationalism was not a doctrine for nation-building so much as a set of political and cultural beliefs, easily aroused when national interests were questioned but normally taken for granted. Elsewhere—in Italy, Germany, Poland, the Austrian and Turkish empires—where peoples of the same nationality were politically divided or subject to foreign rule, nationalism was becoming a deliberate and conscious program for political action. It was undoubtedly the example of the West, of Great Britain and France, successful and flourishing because they were unified nations, that stimulated the ambitions of other peoples to become unified nations too. The period after 1815 was in Germany a time of rising agitation over the national question; in Italy, of the Risorgimento or “resurgence”; in eastern Europe, of the Slavic Revival.

The movement was led by intellectuals, who often found it necessary to instill in their compatriots the very idea of nationality itself. They seized upon Herder’s conception of the Volksgeist, or national spirit, applying its emphasis on national differences to their own people. Usually they began with a cultural nationalism, holding that each people had a language, history, world view, and culture of its own, which must be preserved and perfected. They then usually passed on to a political nationalism, holding that to preserve this national culture, and to ensure liberty and justice for its individual members, each nation should create for itself a sovereign state. Governing authorities, they held, should be of the same nationality and language as those they governed; and all persons of the same national language should be encompassed within the same state.

Since such ideas could not be fully realized without the overthrow of every government in Europe east of France, thoroughgoing nationalism was inherently revolutionary.

Outspoken nationalists were therefore persecuted by the authorities, which drove them everywhere into secret nationalist societies. The Carbonari, organized in Italy in the time of Napoleon, was the best known, but there were many others—like the Veri Italiani, the Apophasimenes, and the Sublime and Perfect Masters. In some regions Masonic lodges might serve the same purpose. In many of the societies nationalism was mixed with liberalism, socialism, or revolutionary republicanism in an undifferentiated way. Members were initiated by a complex ritual intended to impress upon them the dire consequences of betraying the society’s secrets. They used special grips and passwords and adopted revolutionary names to conceal their identity and baffle the police. They were usually so organized that the ordinary member knew the identity of only a few others, and never of the higher-ups, so that those arrested could reveal nothing important. The societies kept busy, circulating forbidden literature and generally maintaining a revolutionary ferment. Conservatives dreaded them, but they were not really dangerous to any government that enjoyed the support of its people.

Best known of the nationalist philosophers in western Europe was the Italian Joseph Mazzini (1805-1872), who spent most of his adult life in exile in France and England. In his youth he joined the Carbonari, but in 1831 he founded a society of his own, called Young Italy, and he edited and smuggled into Italy copies of a journal of the same name. Young Italy was soon imitated by other societies of similar aim, such as Young Germany. In 1834 Mazzini tried unsuccessfully to bring about an uprising against the kingdom of Sardinia, which he viewed as a key obstacle to the unification of Italy. Undeterred by the total failure of this plan, he continued to organize, to conspire, and to write. For Mazzini nationality and revolution were a holy cause in which the most generous and humane qualities were to find expression. He was a moral philosopher, as may be judged from the title of his most widely read book, The Duties of Man, in which he placed duty to the nation intermediate between duty to family and to God.

To the Germans, divided and frustrated, nationality became almost an obsession. It affected everything from folklore to metaphysics. Grimm’s Fairy Tales, for example, was first published in 1812. It was the work of the two Grimm brothers, founders of the modern science of comparative linguistics, who traveled about Germany to study the popular dialects and in doing so collected the folktales that for generations had been current among the common people. They hoped in this way to find the ancient, native, indigenous “spirit” of Germany, deep and unspoiled in the bosom of the Volk. The same preoccupation with nationhood revealed itself in the philosophy of Hegel (1770-1831), possibly the most extraordinary of all nineteenth-century thinkers.

To Hegel, witnessing the spectacle of the Napoleonic years, it was evident that for a people to enjoy freedom, order, or dignity it must possess a potent and independent state.

The state, for him, became the institutional embodiment of reason and liberty—the “march of God through the world,” as he put it, meaning not an expansion in space through vulgar conquest, but a march through time and through the processes of history. Hegel conceived of reality itself as a process of endless change, a development having an inner logic and necessary sequence of its own. He thus broke with the more static and mechanical philosophy of the eighteenth century, with its fixed categories of unchangeable right and wrong. He became a philosopher of history, in which he saw the unfolding of a “Universal Spirit” or “Idea” across time, and he linked this evolving Spirit in complex ways to reason and freedom. He held that change came about through a historical “dialectic,” or irresistible tendency of the Universal Spirit and the human mind to move forward by the creation of opposites. A given state of affairs (the thesis) would in this view inevitably produce the conception of an opposite state of affairs (the antithesis), which would be followed by a reconciliation and fusion of the two (the synthesis). This new synthesis became the starting point for a new “thesis” in the next stage of dialectical change. Thus, for example, the very disunity of Germany, by producing the opposing idea of unity, would ultimately lead toward the creation of a more unified German state.

The Hegelian dialectic was soon to be appropriated by Karl Marx to new uses, but meanwhile Hegel’s philosophy, with other currents in Germany, made the study of history more philosophically meaningful than it had ever been before. History, the study of time process, seemed to be the very key with which to unlock the true significance of the world; it could show the unfolding of the Universal Spirit in specific times and places. Historical studies were stimulated, and the German universities became centers of historical learning, attracting scholars from many countries. Most eminent of the German historians was Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886), founder of the “scientific” school of historical writing. Ranke, too, though intellectually scrupulous to the last degree, owed much of his incentive to his national feeling. His first youthful work was a study of the Latin and Teutonic Peoples; and one of his main ideas, throughout his long life, was that Europe owed its unique greatness to the coexistence and interplay of several distinct nations, which had always resisted the attempts of any one nation to control the whole. By the latter Ranke really meant France—the France of Louis XIV and Napoleon. The Germans, said Ranke in 1830, had a mission from God to develop a culture and a political system entirely different from those of the French. They were destined to “create the pure German state corresponding to the genius of the nation.” Whether Western constitutional, parliamentary, and individualist principles were suited to the national character of Germany seemed to Ranke very doubtful.

In economics Friedrich List, in his National System of Political Economy (1840), held that political economy as taught in England was suited only to England. It was not an abstract truth but a body of ideas developed in a certain historical stage in a certain country. List thus became a founder of the historical or institutional school of economics. The doctrine of free trade, he said, was designed to make England the world’s industrial center by keeping other countries in the status of suppliers of raw material and food. But any country, he held, if it was to be civilized and develop its own national culture, must have cities, factories, industries, and capital of its own. It must therefore put up high tariffs (at least temporarily, in theory) for protection. List, it should be remarked, had developed his ideas during a sojourn in the United States, where Henry Clay’s “American system” was in fact a national system of political economy.

Nationalism: Eastern Europe

In eastern Europe the Poles and the Magyars had long been active political nationalists, the Poles wishing to undo the partitions of Polish territories and reestablish their Polish state, the Magyars insisting on autonomy for their kingdom of Hungary within the Habsburg empire. But for the most part nationalism in eastern Europe long remained more cultural than political. Centuries of development had tended to submerge the Czechs, Slovaks, Ruthenians, Romanians, Serbs, Croats, Slovenes—and even the Poles and Magyars in lesser degree. Their upper classes spoke German or French and looked to Vienna or to Paris for their ideas. The native languages had remained peasant languages, barely known outside the isolated peasant cultures in which they were spoken. It seemed that many of these languages would disappear.

But early in the nineteenth century the new national patriots began to demand the preservation of their historic cultures. They collected folktales and ballads; they studied the languages, composing grammars and dictionaries, often for the first time; and they took to writing books in their mother tongues. They urged their own educated classes to give up foreign ways. They wrote histories showing the famous exploits of their several peoples in the Middle Ages. A new nationalism stirred the Magyars; in 1837 a national Hungarian theater was established at Budapest. In what was to become Romania a former Transylvanian peasant youth named George Lazar began as early as 1816 to teach at Bucharest. He lectured in Romanian (to the surprise of the upper classes, who preferred Greek), telling how Romania had a distinguished history back to the Roman emperor Trajan. As for the Greeks, they entertained visions of restoring the medieval Greek empire (known to Westerners as the Byzantine Empire) in which persons of Greek language or Greek Orthodox religion should become the predominant people of the Balkans.

The most far-reaching of the East European movements was the Slavic Revival. The Slavs included the Russians, Poles, Ukrainians, Byelorussians, and Ruthenians; the Czechs and Slovaks; and the South Slavs, consisting of the Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, and Bulgars. All branches of the Slavs began to develop new nationalisms. In 1814 the Serb Vuk Karajich published a grammar of his native tongue and a collection of Popular Songs and Epics of the Serbs; he worked out a Serbian alphabet, translated the New Testament, and declared that the dialect spoken in the city of Ragusa (now Dubrovnik) should become the literary language of all South Slavs. In 1836 the Czech historian Francis Palacky published the first volume of his History of Bohemia, designed to give the Czechs a new pride in their national past. He first wrote his book in German, the common reading language of educated Czechs. But he soon recast it into Czech, significantly reentitling it a History of the Czech People. Among Poles the poet and revolutionary Adam Mickiewicz must be mentioned. Arrested by the Russians in 1823 for membership in a secret society, he was later allowed by the tsarist government to pass into western Europe. From 1840 to 1844 he taught Slavic literature at the College de France, using his lecture platform as a rostrum to deliver eloquent pleas for the liberation of all peoples and overthrow of autocracy. He wrote epic poems on Polish historical themes and continued to be active among the revolutionary Polish exiles settled in France.

Russia itself, which Poles and Czechs regarded as backward, was slower to develop a pronounced national sense. Under Tsar Alexander I a Western or European orientation prevailed, but in Alexander’s last years and after his death in 1825 the doctrines of Slavophilism began to spread. Russian Slavophilism, or the idea that Russia possessed a way of life of its own, different from and not to be corrupted by that of Europe, became a Russian affirmation of the fundamental idea of the Volksgeist. Such views in Russia were at least as old as the opposition to the reforms of Peter the Great. In the nationalistic nineteenth century they crystallized more systematically into an “ism,” and they tended to merge into Pan-Slavism, which made substantially the same assertions for the Slavic peoples as a whole. But Pan-Slavism, before 1848, was no more than embryonic.

Other "Isms"

Romanticism, liberalism, radical republicanism, socialism, feminism, and nationalism were the political and cultural forces driving many of the new European political and cultural conflicts in the era between 1815 and 1848. Of other “isms” less need be said. Conservatism remained strong. Politically, on the Continent, conservatism upheld the institutions of absolute monarchy, aristocracy, and church and opposed the constitutional and representative government sought by liberals. As a political philosophy, conservatism built upon the ideas of Edmund Burke, who had held that every people must change its institutions by gradual adaptation and that no people could suddenly realize in the present any freedoms not already well prepared for in the past. This doctrine lacked appeal for those to whom the past had been a series of misfortunes, but it gained support among others who sought to define and defend long-evolving social or political traditions. Conservatism sometimes passed into nationalism, since it stressed the firmness and continuity of national character. But nationalists at this time were more often liberals or republicans. Monarchism was conservative and even reactionary. Gone was the enlightened despotism of the previous century, when kings had boldly irritated their nobles and defied their churches. After the thunders of the French Revolution aristocracy and monarchy huddled together, and their new watchword was to maintain “the throne and the altar.”

Deeper than other “isms,” a feeling shared in varying ways by people of all parties, was the profound current of humanitarianism. It consisted in a heightened concern about the cruelty inflicted upon others. Here the thought of the Age of Enlightenment suffered no reversal. Torture was gone, and even conservative monarchical governments showed no inclination to restore it. Conditions in prisons, hospitals, insane asylums, and orphanages improved. People became determined to change the miserable social position of pauper children, chimney sweeps, women in the mines, and enslaved people in the Americas. Russian serf owners and American slave owners began to show psychological signs of moral doubt. To degrade human beings, use them as work animals, torture them, confine them unjustly, hold them as hostages for others, tear apart their families, and punish their relatives were increasingly regarded by Europeans as foreign to true civilization. The Christian sense of the inviolability of the human person was now again, in a more secular, mundane way, beginning to relieve the sufferings of humanity.

54. THE DIKE AND THE FLOOD: DOMESTIC

It is now time to look more specifically at the most influential political reactions and reform movements that emerged after the European peace settlement of 1814-1815. The governments that defeated Napoleon wanted to assure themselves above all else that the disturbances of the past 25 years would not be renewed. In France the restored Bourbon king, Louis XVIII, aspired to keep his throne for himself and his successors. In Great Britain the Tory governing class hoped to preserve the old England that they had so valiantly saved from the clutches of Bonaparte. In Germany, Austria, Italy, and central Europe the chief aim of Mettemich, who for another 33 years remained the dominant political figure in these regions, was to maintain a system in which the prestige of the Habsburg dynasty should be supreme. The aims of the tsar, Alexander, were less clear. He was feared by representatives of the other powers as a dreamer, a self-chosen world savior, a man who said he wanted to bring Christianity into politics, a crowned Jacobin, and even a liberal. It became one of Mettemich’s chief hopes to convert Alexander to conservatism.

The arrangements made by the victorious powers were in some ways moderate, at least when the provocations they had undergone in the Napoleonic wars are considered. Partly by the tsar’s insistence written constitutions existed after 1814 in France and in Russian or “Congress” Poland. Some of the rulers of south German states allowed a measure of representative government. Even the king of Prussia promised a representative assembly for his kingdom, though the promise was not kept. But it was difficult to maintain any kind of stability. The forces of the political right, the privileged classes (or in France the former privileged classes) denounced all signs of liberalism as dangerous concessions to revolution. Those of the political left—liberals, nationalists, republicans—regarded the newly installed regimes as hopelessly reactionary and inadequate. Statesmen were jittery on the subject of revolution. They therefore met every sign of agitation with attempts at repression, which, though they might drive agitation temporarily underground, really only made it worse by creating additional grievances. A vicious circle was set endlessly revolving.

Reaction after 1815: France, Poland

In France Louis XVIII began his reign in 1814 with an amnesty to the regicides of 1793. But the regicides, like all republicans, found the France of 1814 an uncomfortable place to live in, exposed as they were to the unofficial vengeance of counterrevolutionaries, and in 1815 most of them rallied to Napoleon when he returned from Elba. This exasperated the royalist counterrevolutionaries beyond all measure. A brutal “white terror” broke out. Upper-class youths murdered Bonapartists and republicans; Catholic mobs seized and killed Protestants at Marseilles and Toulouse. The Chamber of Deputies chosen in 1815 (by the tiny electorate of 100,000 well-to-do landowners) proved to be more reactionary and royalist than the king. The king himself could not control the mounting frenzy of reaction, which he was sensible enough to realize would only infuriate the revolutionary element still further, as in fact happened. In 1820 a fanatical workingman assassinated the king’s nephew, the Duke de Berry. Those who said that all partisans of the French Revolution were criminal extremists seemed to be justified. The reaction deepened, until in 1824 Louis XVIII died and was succeeded by his brother Charles X. Not only was Charles X the father of the recently murdered Duke de Berry, but for over 30 years he had also been the acknowledged leader of implacable counterrevolution. As the Count of Artois, youngest brother of Louis XVI, he had been among the first to emigrate in 1789. He was the favorite Bourbon among the most obstinate exseigneurs, nobles, and churchmen. Regarding himself as hereditary absolute monarch by the grace of God, he had himself crowned at Reims with all the romantic pomp of ages past, and proceeded to stamp out not only revolutionary republicanism but liberalism and constitutionalism as well.

In Poland, it will be recalled, the Vienna settlement created a constitutional kingdom, with the Russian tsar Alexander as king, joined in merely personal union with the Russian empire. The new machinery did not work very well. The Polish constitution provided for an elected diet, a wide suffrage by the standards of the day, the Napoleonic civil code, freedom of press and religion, and exclusive use of the Polish language. But the Poles discovered that Alexander, though favoring liberty, did not like to have anyone disagree with him. They could make little use of their much touted freedom in any actual legislation. The elected diet could not get along with the viceroy, who was a Russian. In Russia the serfowning aristocracy viewed Alexander’s idea of a constitutional kingdom in Poland with a jaundiced eye. They wanted no experimentation with liberty on the very borders of Russia.

The Poles themselves played into the hands of their enemies. For the Poles were nationalist at least as much as they were liberal. They were dissatisfied with the boundaries accorded to Congress Poland, and they dreamed of the vast kingdom that had existed before the First Partition in 1772. At the University of Vilna professors and students began to join secret societies. Some members of these societies were revolutionaries who wanted to drive out Alexander, reunite with Prussian and Austrian Poland, and reconstitute an independent Polish state. It was in the discovery and breaking up of one such society that Adam Mickiewicz was arrested in 1823. Reaction and repression now struck the University of Vilna.
                        
Reaction after 1815: Tire German States, Britain

In Germany those who had felt national stirrings during the Wars of Liberation were disillusioned by the peace treaty, which maintained the several German principalities about as Napoleon had left them and purposely united them only in a loose federation, or Bund. National ideas were most common in the numerous universities, where students and professors were more susceptible than most people to the doctrines of an eternal Volksgeist and a far-flung Deutschtum. National ideas tended to glorify the German common people and thus carried with them a kind of democratic opposition to aristocrats, princes, and kings. Students in many of the universities in 1815 formed college clubs, called collectively the Burschenschaft, which, as centers of serious political discussion, wdre to replace the older clubs devoted to drinking and dueling. The Burschenschaft, a kind of German youth movement, held a nationwide congress at Wartburg in 1817. Students listened to rousing speeches by patriotic professors, marched about in “Teutonic” costume, and burned a few reactionary books. This undergraduate performance was no immediate threat to any established state, but the nervous governments took alarm. In 1819 a theology student assassinated the German writer Kotzebue, known as an informer in the service of the tsar. The assassin received hundreds of letters of congratulation, and at Nassau the head of the local government barely escaped the same fate at the hands of a pharmacy student.

Mettemich now chose to intervene. He had no authority in Germany except in that Austria was a member of the Germanic federation. He regarded all these manifestations of German national spirit, or of any demand for a more solidly unified Germany, as a threat to the favorable position of the Austrian Empire and to the whole balance of Europe. He called a conference of the principal German states at Carlsbad in Bohemia; the frightened conferees adopted certain resolutions, proposed by Mettemich, which were soon enacted by the diet of the Bund. These Carlsbad Decrees (1819) dissolved the Burschenschaft and the equally nationalistic gymnastic clubs (some of whose members thereupon joined secret societies). They provided for government officials to be placed in the universities and for censors to control the contents of books and the periodical and newspaper press. The Carlsbad Decrees remained in force for many years, and they imposed an effective check on the growth of liberal and nationalist ideas in Germany.

Nor did Great Britain escape the dreary rounds of agitation and repression. As elsewhere, radicalism produced reaction and vice versa. Britain after Waterloo was a country devoted to its old traditions but also afflicted by the most advanced social problems of a rapidly developing industrial economy. In 1815, at the close of the wars, the landed classes feared an inrush of imported agricultural products and consequent collapse of farm prices and rentals. The landowning gentry who controlled Parliament enacted a new Com Law, raising the protective tariff to the point where import of grain became impossible unless prices were very high. Landlords and their farmers benefited, but wage earners and industrial workers found the price of breadstuffs soaring out of reach. At the same time there was a postwar depression in industry. Wages fell and many were thrown out of work. These conditions naturally contributed to the spread of political radicalism, which looked first of all to a drastic reform of the House of Commons in order that thereafter a radical program of social and economic legislation might be enacted.

A riot broke out in London in December 1816. In the following February the Prince Regent was attacked in his carriage. The government suspended habeas corpus and employed agents provocateurs to obtain evidence against the agitators. Industrialists of Manchester and the new factory towns, determined to force through the reform of parliamentary representation, took the chance offered by the distress of the working classes to organize mass meetings of protest. At Birmingham a crowd elected a mock member of Parliament. At sprawling Manchester 80,000 people staged an enormous demonstration at St. Peter’s Fields in 1819; they demanded universal male suffrage, annual election of the House of Commons, and the repeal of the Com Laws. Although perfectly orderly they were fired upon by soldiers; 11 persons were killed and about 400 were wounded, including 113 women. Radicals called this episode the Peterloo massacre in derisive comparison with the battle of Waterloo.

The frightened government thanked the soldiers for their brave upholding of the social order. Parliament rushed through the Six Acts (1819), which out-lawed “seditious and blasphemous” literature, put a heavy stamp tax on newspapers, authorized the search of private houses for arms, and rigidly restricted the right of public meeting. A group of revolutionaries thereupon plotted to assassinate the whole cabinet at a dinner; they were caught in Cato Street in London in 1820—whence the name “Cato Street Conspiracy.” Five of them were hanged. Meanwhile, for publishing the writings of Thomas Paine, Richard Carlisle spent seven years in prison.

“Our example,” wrote the Duke of Wellington to a Continental correspondent in 1819, “will be of value in France and Germany, and it is to be hoped that the world will escape from the general revolution with which we all seem to be threatened.”

In summary, the various European governments promoted reactionary policies everywhere they could reach in the years following the peace of 1815. The reaction was due only in part to memories of the French Revolution. It was due even more to the living fear of revolution in the present. This fear, though exaggerated, was no mere hallucination. Sensing the rising flood, the established interests desperately built dikes against it in every country. The same is true of international politics at the time.

55. THE DIKE AND THE FLOOD: INTERNATIONAL

At the Congress of Vienna in 1814-1815 the powers agreed to hold meetings in the future to enforce the treaty and take up new issues as they arose. A number of congresses of the Great Powers resulted, which are of significance as an experimental step toward international regulation of the affairs of Europe. The congresses resembled, in a tentative and partial way, the League of Nations that arose after the First World War of 1914—1918, or the United Nations that followed after the war of 1939-1945. The powers had also, in 1815, in alarm after the return of Napoleon, subscribed to Alexander I’s Holy Alliance, which became the popular term for the collaboration of the European states in the congresses. The Holy Alliance, on the face of it a statement of Christian purpose and international concord, gradually became an alliance for the suppression of revolutionary and even liberal activity, following in that respect the trend of the governments which made it up.

The Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1818

The first general postwar assemblage of the powers took place at the congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (or Aachen) in 1818. The principal item on the agenda was to withdraw the allied army of occupation from France. The French argued that Louis XVIII would never be popular in France so long as he was supported by a foreign army. The other powers, since they all desired the French to forget the past and accept the Bourbons, withdrew their military forces without disagreement. They arranged also to have private bankers take over the French reparations debt (the 700 million francs imposed by the second Treaty of Paris); the bankers paid the allied governments, and the French in due time paid the bankers.

Tsar Alexander was still the most advanced internationalist of the day.

He suggested at Aix-la-Chapelle a kind of permanent European union and even proposed the maintenance of international military forces to safeguard recognized states against changes by violence. Governments if thus reassured against revolution, he argued, would more willingly grant constitutional and liberal reforms. But the others demurred, especially the British foreign minister Lord Castlereagh. The British declared themselves willing to make international commitments against specified contingencies, such as a revival of aggression on the part of France. But they would assume no obligations to act upon indefinite and unforeseeable future events. They reserved the right of independent judgment in foreign policy.

Concretely, the congress addressed itself to the problems of the Atlantic slave trade and of the recurring nuisance of the Barbary pirates. It was unanimously agreed that both should be suppressed. To suppress them required naval forces, which only the British possessed in adequate amount, and it meant also that naval captains must be authorized to stop and search vessels at sea. The continental states, always touchy on the subject of British sea power, refused to countenance any such uses of the British fleet. They feared for the freedom of the seas. As for the British, they would not even discuss placing British warships in an international naval pool or putting British squadrons under the authority of an international body. Nothing therefore was done; the slave trade continued, booming illicitly with the endless demand for cotton; and the Barbary pirates were not disposed of until the French occupied and annexed Algeria some years later. The growth of international institutions was blocked by the separate interests of the sovereign states.

Revolution in Southern Europe: Tire Congress of Troppau, 1820

Scarcely had the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle disbanded when revolutionary agitation came to a crisis in southern Europe. It was not that revolutionary or liberal sentiment was stronger here than in the north, but rather that the governments in question, those of Spain, Naples, and the Ottoman Empire, were inefficient, flimsy, and corrupt. Many of the revolutionaries were hardly more than middle-class liberals; indeed, the Spaniards, as we have noted, were the first to use the word “liberal” in this modern political sense. Many of them had at first accepted the Napoleonic occupation of Spain as a progressive development but had then turned against it and proclaimed a new constitution in 1812, modeled on the French revolutionary constitution of 1789-1791 .After Napoleon’s final defeat they attempted to force the restored Bourbon kings of Spain and Naples to adopt this constitution of 1812.

In 1820 the governments of both Spain and Naples collapsed with remarkable ease before the demonstrations of revolutionaries. The kings of both countries reluctantly took oaths to the Spanish constitution of 1812.

But Metternich saw the insurrections as the first symptoms of a revolutionary seizure against which Europe should be quarantined. It was a fact that revolutionary agitation was international, easily leaping across frontiers, because of the operations of secret societies and of political exiles and because in any case the same ideas had been aroused in all countries by the French Revolution. Metternich considered Italy in particular to be within the legitimate sphere of influence of the Austrian Empire. Fie therefore called a meeting of the Great Powers at Troppau in the Austrian-controlled region in Silesia, hoping to use the authority of an international congress to put down the revolution in Naples. The governments of Great Britain and France, not eager to play Austria’s game, sent only observers to the congress. Metternich’s main problem was, as usual, Alexander. What would be the attitude of the liberal tsar, the friend and patron of constitutions, toward the idea of a constitutional monarchy in Naples? At an inn in Troppau Metternich and Alexander met alone, and there held a momentous interview over the teacups. Metternich reviewed the horrors of revolutionism, the unwisdom of granting any concessions lest revolutionaries be encouraged. Alexander was already somewhat disillusioned by the ungrateful feelings of the Poles, and the upheaval in Naples posed a new threat to his view of royal authority. He had always believed that constitutions should be granted by legitimate sovereigns, not extorted from them by revolutionaries, as had happened in Naples. He allowed himself to be persuaded by Metternich. He declared that he had always been wrong and that Metternich had always been right; and he announced himself ready to follow Metternich’s political judgment.

Thus fortified, Metternich drew up a document, the protocol of Troppau, for consideration and acceptance by the five Great Powers. It held that all recognized European states should be protected by collective international action, in the interests of general peace and stability, from internal changes brought about by force. It was a statement of collective security against revolution. Neither France nor Great Britain accepted it. Castlereagh wrote to Metternich that if Austria felt its interests to be threatened in Naples it should intervene in its own name only. The British Tories did not object to the repression of the Neapolitan revolution, but they rejected the principle of a binding international collaboration.

Metternich could get only Russia and Prussia to endorse his protocol, in addition to Austria. These three, acting as the Congress of Troppau, authorized Metternich to dispatch an Austrian army into Naples. He did so; the Neapolitan revolutionaries were arrested or put to flight; the incompetent and brutal Ferdinand I was restored as “absolute” king; the demon of revolution was seemingly exorcised. But the Congress of Troppau, ostensibly a Europewide international body, had in effect functioned as an antirevolutionary alliance of Austria, Russia, and Prussia. A gap opened between the three Eastern autocracies and the two Western powers—even when the latter consisted of Tories and Bourbons.

Spain and the Near East: The Congress of Verona, 1822

Thousands of revolutionaries and liberals fled from the terror raging in Italy. Many went to Spain, now dreaded by conservatives as the main seat of revolutionary infection. The Middle East also seemed about to ignite in conflagration. Alexander Ypsilanti, a Greek who had spent his adult life in the military service of Russia, in 1821 led a band of armed followers from Russia into Romania (then still a part of Turkey), hoping that all Greeks and pro-Greeks in the Turkish empire would join him. He expected Russian support, since Russia had long wanted to use Greek Christians in a campaign to weaken the Turkish empire. The possibility of a Turkish empire converted into a “Greek” empire and dependent on Russia was naturally unpleasant to Metternich. To deal with all these matters an international congress met at Verona in 1822.

Alexander, in shifting from liberal to reactionary views, had not changed his belief in the need for concerted international action. Had pure power politics determined his decisions, he would doubtless have favored Ypsilanti’s Grecophile revolution. But he stood by the principle of international solidarity against revolutionary violence. He refused to support Ypsilanti, who found less enthusiasm for Greek culture among the Romanians and Balkan peoples than he had expected and was soon defeated by the Turks. As for intervention to repress the uprising in Greece itself, the question did not arise since the Turkish government proved quite able for a time to handle the matter without assistance.

The question of the revolution in Spain was settled by foreign intervention. The Bourbon regime in France had no taste for a Spain in which revolutionaries, republicans, political exiles, and members of secret societies might be harbored. The French government proposed to the Congress of Verona that it be authorized to dispatch an army across the Pyrenees. The Congress welcomed the offer, and despite many dire predictions of min, arising from memories of Napoleon’s disaster, a French army of 200,000 men moved into Spain in 1823. The campaign proved to be a military promenade through a cheering country. Spanish liberals, constitutionalists, or revolutionaries were a helpless minority. The mass of the people saw the invasion as a deliverance from Masons, Carbonari, and heretics and shouted with satisfaction at the restoration of church and king. Ferdinand VII, unscrupulous and narrow-minded, repudiated his constitutional oath and let the most reactionary Spaniards have their way. The revolutionaries were savagely persecuted, exiled, or jailed.

Latin American Independence

The Napoleonic wars and later political disturbances in Europe had their repercussions in all parts of America. While Great Britain was engaged against Napoleon, the United States fought its inconclusive War of 1812 against the former mother country, and a few years later, after minor military operations, obtained the cession of Florida from Spain. During these same years, new movements for national independence emerged in Latin America and used the turmoil in Europe as an opportunity to break free from the weakening Portuguese and Spanish empires. The Portuguese royal family, to escape Napoleon, had taken refuge in its Brazilian empire, but when the dynasty was restored at Lisbon, one of its members refused to leave Brazil, which remained as an “empire” independent of Portugal; in 1889 the imperial regime gave way to a new Brazilian republic.

Spanish America reached over the enormous area from San Francisco to Buenos Aires. Here, too, the thought of the Enlightenment, the news of the American and French revolutions, the Napoleonic occupation of Spain, and the restoration in 1814 of the Bourbon Ferdinand VII to the Spanish throne all had their effects. The British had been commercially active in Spanish America for over a century, and during the Napoleonic wars they had increased their exports to it twentyfold. There were thus business interests in Spanish America that resisted any return to the old Spanish imperial system of trade controls. More fundamental was the political and social resentment that Creoles felt for the peninsulars. The Creoles were the white population of Spanish descent born in America, and they found their ambitions blocked by the peninsulars who were sent out from Spain to occupy the highest offices in the empire. In many places most of the people were native Indians or mestizos of mixed Spanish and Indian origin, often living in depressed economic conditions and far from the capital cities. The movement for independence in most of Latin America therefore lacked the more widespread popular character that it had developed in the British colonies that became the United States. It was mainly led by Creoles who were active in municipal governments in the towns. At times, the movement for independence recruited some very conservative elements among large landowners and high churchmen. But the important leaders, such as Sim6n Bolivar and Jos6 de San Martin, were men who had spent years in Europe and preferred the new constitutional principles but were in the end frustrated in their aspirations for their own country. The dissensions that long continued to afflict Spanish America were all present within the independence movement itself.

Because of its vast extent, over 6,000 miles interrupted by mountain barriers, there could be less unity in the liberation of Spanish America than had been possible, however difficult, in the North American rebellion against England. There could be no Continental Congress such as had met in Philadelphia in 1774. Revolts took place separately within the great vice-royalties: New Spain (Mexico), New Granada (Colombia and Venezuela), Peru (including Ecuador and most of Bolivia and Chile), and La Plata (Argentina, with claims over what are now Uruguay and Paraguay).

The first revolts were against Joseph Bonaparte after Napoleon made him king of Spain in 1808. The rebels proclaimed their loyalty to the deposed Ferdinand VII, who, however, when restored in 1814, refused to make any concessions to American demands, so that revolutionary sentiment turned against him also. There followed a series of disconnected struggles between those fighting for independence (with or without much internal change) and combinations of officials, army officers, landowners, and churchmen who remained loyal to the Spanish crown. Bolivar became the liberator of Venezuela and Colombia. San Martin became the liberator of Argentina and Chile, and both combined in the liberation of Peru. In Mexico, by way of exception, there was a true mass rising of Indians and mestizos, which was put down by the middle- and upper-class leaders. This conservative repression of a more popular revolutionary movement led to a long period of turmoil in the newly independent Mexican state, but Mexico was by no means the only postcolonial society that faced such problems. All Spanish America was troubled by disputes over boundaries, regional conflicts and attempted conquests and secessions, so that it was only later in the nineteenth century that the map of South and Central America took form as we know it today.

In addition to these complex conflicts among themselves, the emerging Latin American nations remained vulnerable to the imperial interventions of outside powers. Let us return to the congress of European powers meeting in Verona in 1822. At the very time when a French army suppressed the revolution in Spain, the revolutionaries in Spanish America were declaring their independence. At Verona, Tsar Alexander urged the Congress to mediate between Spain and its colonies. This was a euphemistic way of suggesting military intervention in Spanish America, following the principle of repressing revolutions that had been announced at Troppau. The British objected. Even the Tory government favored revolutions that might break up the Spanish empire into independent states, with which free trade treaties might be negotiated. Without at least benevolent neutrality from the British fleet no armed force could sail to America. The Spanish Americans therefore maintained their independence, thanks in part to the use made by the British of their sea power on this occasion.

The new republics also received strong moral support from the United States. In December 1823 President James Monroe, in a message to Congress, announced the “Monroe Doctrine.” It stated that attempts by European powers to return parts of America to colonial status would be viewed as an unfriendly act by the United States. The British foreign minister George Canning(who had just succeeded Castlereagh) had at first proposed a joint statement by Great Britain and the United States against the East European powers on the Spanish-American question. President Monroe, at the advice of his secretary of state, John Quincy Adams, decided instead to make a unilateral statement in the form of a message to Congress. They intended to aim their “doctrine” at Great Britain as well as the Continental states, since the British, with their command of the sea, were in fact the only power that could actually threaten the independence of American states at this time. Canning, having no such threats in mind, and concerned more with the Congress of Verona, accepted the line taken by the United States. Indeed, he declared with a flourish that he had “called the New World into existence to redress the balance of the Old.” The Monroe Doctrine, at its inception, was a kind of counterblast to the Metternich doctrine of the protocol of Troppau. Where the latter announced the principle of intervention against revolution, the Monroe Doctrine announced that revolutions in America, if they resulted in regimes recognized by the United States, were outside the pale of attention of European powers. In any case, the efficacy of the Monroe Doctrine long depended on the tacit cooperation of the British fleet.

Over 300 years of European colonial empires in America now came to an end, with few exceptions, in the half-century following the United States declaration of independence. One exception was Canada, where membership in the British empire was voluntary, at least for the English-speaking inhabitants, and where both the English and French Canadians resisted threats of annexation by the United States. The other exceptions were in the West Indies, where Haiti was independent; the smaller islands remained British, French, or Dutch; and the large islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico remained Spanish until the Spanish-American War of 1898.

The End of the Congress System

After the Congress of Verona no more such meetings were held. The attempt at a formal international regulation of European affairs was given up. In the broadest retrospect, the congresses failed to make progress toward an international order because, especially after Alexander’s conversion to Metternich’s conservatism, they came to stand for nothing except preservation of the status quo. They made no attempt at accommodation with the new forces that were shaping Europe. It was not the policy of the congresses to forestall revolution by demanding that governments institute reforms. They simply repressed or punished all revolutionary agitation. They propped up governments that could not stand on their own feet.

In any case the congresses never succeeded in subordinating the separate interests of the Great Powers. Perhaps Alexander’s repudiation of Ypsilanti was a sacrifice of Russian advantage to international principle; but when the Austrian government intervened to crush the revolution in Naples, and when the French government crushed the revolution in Spain, though in both cases they acted with an international mandate, each was really promoting what it conceived to be its own interests. The interest of Great Britain was to pull away from the system entirely. As defined by Castlereagh and by Canning after him, it was to stand aloof from permanent international commitments, to preserve a free exercise of sea power and foreign policy, and to take a benevolent view toward revolution in other countries. Since France eventually pulled away also, the Holy Alliance ceased to be even ostensibly a European system and became no more than a counterrevolutionary league of the three East European autocracies. The cause of liberalism in Europe was thus advanced by the collapse of this highly conservative international system. At the same time the collapse of this system opened the way to the uncontrolled nationalism of the sovereign states. “Things are getting back to a wholesome state again,” wrote George Canning in 1822. “Every nation for itself and God for us all!”

Russia: The Decembrist Revolt, 1825

Alexander I, “the man who defeated Napoleon,” the ruler who had led his armies from Moscow to Paris, who had frightened the diplomats by the Russian shadow that he threw over the Continent, and who yet in his way had been the great pillar of constitutional liberalism and international order, died in 1825. His death was the signal for revolution in Russia. Officers of the Russian army, during the campaigns of 1812-1815 in Europe, had become acquainted with many unsettling ideas. Secret societies were formed even in the Russian officer corps; their members held all sorts of conflicting ideas, some wanting a constitutional tsardom in Russia, some demanding a republic, some even dreaming of an emancipation of the serfs. When Alexander died it was for a time uncertain which of his two brothers, Constantine or Nicholas, should succeed him. The restless coteries in the army preferred Constantine, who was thought to be more favorable to innovations in the state. In December 1825 they proclaimed Constantine at St. Petersburg, having their soldiers shout “Constantine and Constitution!” The soldiers, it is said, thought that Constitution was Constantine’s wife.

But the fact was that Constantine had already renounced his claims in favor of Nicholas, who was the rightful heir. The uprising, known as the Decembrist revolt, was soon put down. Five of the mutinous officers were hanged; many others were condemned to forced labor or interned in Siberia. The Decembrist revolt was the first manifestation of the modern revolutionary movement in Russia—of a revolutionary movement inspired by an ideological program, as distinguished from the elemental mass upheavals of Pugachev or Stephen Razin in earlier times. But the immediate effect of the Decembrist revolt was to clamp repression upon Russia more firmly. Nicholas I (1825-1855) maintained an unconditional and despotic autocracy.

Ten years after the defeat of Napoleon the new forces issuing from the French Revolution seemed to be routed, and reaction, repression, and political immobility seemed to prevail everywhere in Europe. The dike—a massive dike—seemed to be containing the flood.

56. THE BREAKTHROUGH OF LIBERALISM

IN THE WEST: REVOLUTIONS OF 1830-1832

The reactionary dike broke in 1830, and in western Europe the stream thereafter never stopped. The seepage, indeed, had already begun. By 1825 Spanish America was independent. The British and the French had pulled away from the congress system. The Greek nationalist movement against the Turks had broken out in the early 1820s.

With the defeat of Ypsilanti in 1821 the Greek nationalists turned somewhat away from the idea of a neo-Greek empire and more toward the idea of independence for Greece proper, the islands and peninsulas where Greek was the predominant language. Tsar Nicholas was more willing than Alexander to assist this movement. The governments of Great Britain and France were not inclined to let Russia stand as the only champion of Balkan peoples. Moreover, liberals in the West thought of the embattled Greeks as ancient Athenians fighting the modern oriental despotism of the Turkish empire.

The result was a joint Anglo-French-Russian naval intervention, which destroyed the Turkish fleet at Navarino Bay in 1827. Russia again, as often in the past, sent armies into the Balkans. A Russo-Turkish war and a great Middle Eastern crisis followed, in the course of which the rival powers agreed in 1829 to recognize Greece as an independent kingdom. The Balkan states of Serbia, Wallachia, and Moldavia were also recognized as autonomous principalities within the badly shaken Ottoman Empire (see map p. 649). From the same crisis Egypt emerged as an autonomous region under Mehemet Ali. Egypt in time became a center of Arabic nationalism, which reduced Ottoman power in the south just as Balkan nationalism did in the north.

France, 1824-1830: The July Revolution, 1830

It was in 1830, and first of all in France, that the wall of reaction really collapsed. Charles X became king in 1824. In the next year the legislative chambers voted an indemnity, in the form of perpetual annuities totaling 30 million francs a year, to those who as Emigres thirty-odd years before had had their property confiscated by the revolutionary state. Catholic clergy began to take over classrooms in the schools. A law pronounced the death penalty for sacrilege committed in church buildings. But the France of the restored Bourbons was still a free country, and against these apparent efforts to revive the Old Regime a strong opposition developed in the newspapers and in the chambers. In March 1830 the Chamber of Deputies, in which the bankers Laffitte and Casimier-Périer led the “leftist” opposition, passed a vote of no confidence in the government. The king, as was his legal right, dissolved the Chamber and called for new elections. The elections repudiated the king’s policies. He replied on July 26, 1830, with four ordinances issued on his own authority. One dissolved the newly elected Chamber before it had ever met; another imposed censorship on the press; the third so amended the suffrage as to reduce the voting power of bankers, merchants, and industrialists and to concentrate it in the hands of the old-fashioned aristocracy; the fourth called for an election on the new basis.

These July Ordinances produced on the very next day the July Revolution. The upper bourgeois class was of course desperate at being thus brazenly ousted from political life. But it was the republicans—the nucleus of revolutionary workers, students, and intelligentsia in Paris—who actually moved. For three days, from July 27 to 29, barricades were erected in the city, behind which a swarming populace defied the army and the police. Most of the army refused to fire. Charles X, in no mood to be made captive by a revolution like his long-dead brother Louis XVI, precipitately abdicated and headed for England.

Some of the leaders wished to proclaim a democratic republic. Working people hoped for better conditions of employment. The political liberals, supported by bankers, industrialists, various journalists, and intellectuals, had other aims. They had been satisfied in general with the constitutional charter of 1814; it was only to the policies and personnel of the government that they had objected, and they wished now to continue with constitutional monarchy, somewhat liberalized, and with a king whom they could trust. A solution to the deadlock was found by Lafayette, the aging hero of the American and the French revolutions, who became commander of the reorganized National Guard and a popular symbol of national unity. Lafayette produced the Duke of Orleans on the balcony of the Paris Hôtel de Ville, embraced him before a great concourse of people, and offered him as the answer to France’s need. The duke was a collateral relative of the Bourbons; he had also, as a young man, served in the republican army of 1792. The militant republicans accepted him, willing to see what would develop; and the Chamber of Deputies on August 7 offered him the throne, on condition that he observe faithfully the constitutional charter of 1814. He reigned, until 1848, under the title of Louis Philippe.

The regime of Louis Philippe, called the Orléanist, bourgeois, or July Monarchy, was viewed very differently by different groups in France and in Europe. To the other states of Europe and to the clergy and legitimists within France, it seemed shockingly revolutionary. The new king owed his throne to an insurrection, to a bargain made with republicans, and to promises made to the Chamber of Deputies. He called himself not king of France but king of the French, and he flew the tricolor flag of the Revolution in place of the Bourbon lily. The tricolor produced an effect on the established classes not unlike that of the hammer and sickle after the Russian Revolution. He cultivated a popular manner, wore sober dark clothing (the ancestor of the modern business suit), and carried an umbrella. Though in private he worked stubbornly to maintain his royal position, in public he adhered scrupulously to the constitution.

The constitution remained substantially what it had been in 1814. The main political change was one of tone; there would be no more absolutism, with its notion that constitutional guarantees could be abrogated by a reigning prince. Legally the main change was that the Chamber of Peers ceased to be hereditary, to the chagrin of the old nobility, and that the Chamber of Deputies was to be elected by a somewhat enlarged body of voters. Where before 1830 there had been 100,000 voters, there were now about 200,000. The right to vote was still based on the ownership of a considerable quantity of real estate. About one-thirtieth of the adult male population (the top thirtieth in the possession of real property) now elected the Chamber of Deputies. The beneficiaries of the new system were the upper bourgeoisie—the bankers, merchants, and industrialists. The big property owners constituted the pays légal, the “legal country,” and to them the July Monarchy was the consummation and stopping place of political progress. To others, and especially to the radical democrats, it proved as the years passed to be a disillusionment and an annoyance.

Revolutions of 1830: Belgium and Poland

The immediate effect of the three-day Paris revolution of 1830 was to set off a series of similar explosions throughout Europe, most notably in Belgium and Poland. These in turn, coming after the collapse of the Bourbons in France, brought the whole peace settlement of 1815 into jeopardy. It will be recalled that the Congress of Vienna had joined Belgium with the Dutch Netherlands to create a strong buffer state against a resurgent France and had also done what it could to prevent direct pressure of Russian power upon central Europe by way of Poland. Both these arrangements were now undone.

The Dutch-Belgium union proved economically beneficial, for Belgian industry complemented the commercial and shipping activity of the Dutch, but politically it worked poorly, especially since the Dutch king had absolutist and centralizing ideas. The Belgians, though they had never been independent, had always stood stiffly for their local liberties under former Austrian rulers (and Spanish before them); now they did the same against the Dutch. The Catholic Belgians disliked Dutch Protestantism; those Belgians who spoke French (the Walloons) objected to regulations requiring the use of Dutch. About a month after the July Revolution in Paris disturbances broke out in Brussels. The leaders asked only for local Belgian self-government, but when the king took arms against them, they went on to proclaim independence. A national assembly met and drafted a constitution.

Nicholas of Russia wished to send troops to stamp out the Belgian uprising. But he could not get his forces safely through Poland. In Poland, too, in 1830, a revolution broke out. The Polish nationalists saw in the fall of the French Bourbons a timely moment for them to strike. They objected also to the appearance of Russian troops bound presumably to suppress freedom in western Europe. One incident led to another, until in January 1831 the Polish diet proclaimed the dethronement of the Polish king (i.e., Nicholas), who thereupon sent in a large army. The Poles, outnumbered and divided among themselves, could put up no successful resistance. They obtained no support from the West. The British government was unsettled by agitation at home. The French government, newly installed under Louis Philippe, had no wish to appear disturbingly revolutionary, and in any case feared the Polish agents who sought its backing as international firebrands and republicans. The Polish revolution was therefore crushed. Congress Poland disappeared; its constitution was abrogated, and it was merged into the Russian empire. Thousands of Poles settled in western Europe, where they became familiar figures in republican circles. In Poland the engines of repression rolled. The tsar’s government exiled some thousands to Siberia, began to Russify the Eastern Border, and closed the universities of Warsaw and Vilna. Since it was too late for the tsar any longer to contemplate intervention in Belgium, it may be said that the sacrifice of the Poles contributed to the success of the West European revolution of 1830, as it had to that of the French Revolution of 1789-1795.

It was true enough, as Nicholas maintained, that an independent Belgium presented great international problems. Belgium for 20 years before 1815 had been part of France. A few Belgians now favored reunion with it, and in France the republican left, which regarded the Vienna treaty as an insult to the French nation, saw an opportunity to win back this first and dearest conquest of the First Republic. In 1831, by a small majority, the Belgian national assembly elected as their king the son of Louis Philippe, who, however, not wishing trouble with the British, forbade his son to accept it. The Belgians thereupon elected Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, a German princeling who had married into the British royal family and became a British subject. He was in fact the uncle of a 12-year-old girl who was to be Queen Victoria. The British negotiated with Talleyrand, sent over by the French government (it was his last public service); and the result was a treaty of 1831 (confirmed in 1839) setting up Belgium as a perpetually neutral state, incapable of forming alliances and guaranteed against invasion by all five of the Great Powers. The aim intended by the Treaty of Vienna, to prevent the annexation of Belgium to France, was thus again realized in a new way. Internally Belgium presently settled down to a stable parliamentary system, somewhat more democratic than the July Monarchy in France but fundamentally offering the same type of bourgeois and liberal rule.

Reform in Great Britain

The three-day Paris revolution of 1830 had direct repercussions across the Channel. The quick results following on working-class insurrection gave radical leaders in England the idea that threats of violence might be useful. On the other hand, the ease and speed with which the French bourgeoisie gained the upper hand reassured the British middle classes, who concluded that they might unsparingly embarrass the government without courting a mass upheaval.

The Tory regime in England had in fact already begun to loosen up. A group of new Tory leaders came forward in the 1820s, notably George Canning, the foreign minister, and Robert Peel, son of one of the first cotton manufacturers. This group was sensitive to the needs of British business and to the liberal doctrines of free trade. They reduced tariffs and liberalized the old Navigation Acts, permitting British colonies to trade with countries other than Britain. The Liberal Tories also undermined the legal position of the Chinch of England, forwarding the conception of a secular state, though such was hardly their purpose. They repealed the old laws (which dated from the seventeenth century) forbidding dissenting Protestants to hold public office except through a legal fiction by which they pretended to be Anglicans. They even allowed the Test Act of 1673 to be repealed and Catholic Emancipation to be adopted. Catholics in Great Britain and Ireland received the same rights as others. Capital punishment was abolished for about a hundred offenses. A professional police force was introduced in place of the old-fashioned and ineffectual local constables. (It is after Robert Peel that London policemen came to be called “bobbies.”) The new police were expected to handle protest meetings, angry crowds, or occasional riots without having to call for military assistance.

There were two things that the Liberal Tories could not do. They could not question the Com Laws, and they could not reform the House of Commons. By the Com Laws, which set the tariff on imported grain, a tariff raised to new heights in 1815, the gentlemen of England protected their rent rolls; and by the existing structure of the House of Commons they governed the country, expecting the working class and the business interests to look to them as natural leaders.

Never in 500 years of its history had the Commons been so unrepresentative. No new borough had been created since the Revolution of 1688. The boroughs, or urban centers having the right to elect members of Parliament, were heavily concentrated in southern England. Although the Industrial Revolution was shifting population noticeably to the north, the new factory towns were not represented in Parliament. In a few boroughs real elections took place, but in some of them it was the town corporation, and in others the owners of certain pieces of real estate, that had the right to name members of Parliament. Each borough was different, carrying over the local liberties of the Middle Ages. Many boroughs were entirely dominated by influential persons called borough-mongers by their critics. As for the rural districts, the “forty-shilling freeholders” chose two members of Parliament for each county, in a convivial assembly much influenced by the gentlefolk. It was estimated about 1820 that fewer than 500 men, most of them members of the House of Lords, really selected a majority of the House of Commons.

Some two dozen bills to reform the House of Commons had been introduced in the half-century preceding 1830. They had all failed to pass. In 1830, after the Paris revolution, the issue was again raised by the minority party, the Whigs. The Tory prime minister, the Duke of Wellington, the victor of Waterloo and a most extreme conservative, so immoderately defended the existing system that he lost the confidence even of some of his own followers. The existing methods of election in England, he declared, were more perfect than any that human intelligence could contrive at a single stroke. After this outburst a Whig ministry took over the government. It introduced a reform bill. The House of Commons rejected it. The Whig ministry thereupon resigned. The Tories, fearing popular violence, refused to take the responsibility for forming a cabinet. The Whigs resumed office and again introduced their reform bill. This time it passed the Commons but failed in the House of Lords. An angry roar went up over the country. Crowds milled in the London streets, rioters for several days were in control at Bristol, the jail at Derby was sacked, and Nottingham castle was burned. Only the passage of the reform bill, it seemed, could prevent an actual revolution. Using this argument, the Whigs got the king to promise to create enough new peers to change the majority in the House of Lords. The Lords yielded rather than be swamped, and in April 1832 the bill became law.

The Reform Bill of 1832 was a very English measure. It adapted the English or medieval system rather than following the new ideas of the French Revolution. On the Continent, constitutional political systems in countries such as France rested on the idea that each representative should represent roughly the same number of voters and that voters should qualify to vote by a flat uniform qualification, usually the payment of a stated amount of property taxes. The British held to the idea that members of the House of Commons represented boroughs and counties, in general without regard to size of population (with exceptions). In other words, no attempt was made to create equal electoral districts, and the vote was still distributed in the reformed boroughs and counties on the basis of economic status, reliability, and permanence. The total effect on the size of the electorate was to raise the number of voters in the British Isles from about 500,000 to about 813,000. Some persons actually lost their votes, namely, the poorer elements in the handful of old boroughs which had been fairly democratic, like the borough of Westminster in greater London.

The most important change was not the increased size of the electorate but its redistribution by region and by class. The Reform Bill reallocated the seats in the House of Commons. Fifty-six of the smallest older boroughs were abolished, their inhabitants thereafter voting as residents of their counties. Thirty other small boroughs kept the right to send only one burgess to Parliament instead of the historic two. The 143 seats thus made available were given to the new industrial towns, where the middle classes now gained the right to vote—factory owners and businessmen and their principal employees, doctors, lawyers, brokers, merchants, and newspaper people, relatives and connections of the well-to-do.

The Reform Bill of 1832 was more sweeping than the Whigs would have favored except for their fear or revolution. It was more conservative than the democratic radicals would have accepted, except for their belief that the suffrage might be widened in the future. Whether Great Britain in 1830 was in danger of any real revolution can never be known. A distressed mass of workers was led by an irate manufacturing class that was unwilling to tolerate any longer its exclusion from political life, yet neither the workers nor the industrialists turned toward violence and revolution. The reason probably lies first of all in the existence of the historic institution of Parliament, which, erratic though it was before the Reform Bill, provided the means by which social changes could be legally accomplished and continued, in principle, to enjoy universal respect. Conservatives, driven to the wall, would yield; they could allow a revision of the suffrage because they could expect to remain themselves in public life. Radicals, using enough violence to scare the established interest, did not thereafter face a blank wall; they could expect, once the breach was made, to carry some day a further democratization of Parliament and with it their social and economic program by orderly legislation.

Britain after 1832

But the Reform Bill of 1832 was in its way a revolution. The new business interests, created by industrialization, took their place alongside the old aristocracy in the governing elite of the country. The aristocratic Whigs who had carried the Reform Bill gradually merged with formerly radical industrialists and with a few Liberal Tories to form the Liberal party. The main body of the Tories, joined by a few old Whigs and even a few former radicals, gradually turned into the Conservative party. The two parties alternated in power at short intervals from 1832 to the First World War, this being the classic period in Great Britain of the Liberal-Conservative two-party system.

In 1833 slavery was abolished in the British Empire. In 1834 a new Poor Law was adopted. In 1835 the Municipal Corporations Act, second only to the Reform Bill in basic importance, modernized the local government of English cities; it broke up the old local oligarchies and brought in uniform electoral and administrative machinery, enabling city dwellers to grapple more effectively with the problems of

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1780-1869

              Mechanical spinning of cotton spreads across England
1792          Mary Wollstonecraft publishes A Vindication of the Rights of Women
1807          Robert Fulton uses the steam engine to propel river boats
1819          “Peterloo Massacre” suppresses protesting English workers in Manchester
1819          Metternich’s “Carlsbad Decrees" suppress the German nationalist movement
1820          Congress of Troppau calls for international action against all revolutions
1823          Monroe Doctrine opposes European intervention in Latin America
1825          Decembrist Revolt of military officers is put down in Russia
1829          Steam locomotive is tested safely in England
l830          July Revolution in France forces abdication of Charles X; Louis-Philippe becomes king
1831          Russia suppresses national movement in Poland
1832          Reform Bill widens British suffrage; alters representation in Parliament
1839          Louis Blanc’s Organization of Work promotes new socialist ideas
1846          Repeal of Corn Laws marks ascendancy of British industrial interests
1869          John Stuart Mill argues for women's rights in The Subjection of Women

urban life. In 1836 the House of Commons allowed the newspapers to report how its members voted—a long step toward publicity of government proceedings was thus taken. Meanwhile an ecclesiastical commission reviewed the affairs of the Church of England; financial and administrative irregularities were corrected, together with the grosser inequalities between the income of upper and lower clergy, all of which had made the church formerly a kind of closed preserve for the landed gentry.

The Tories, thus assaulted in their immemorial strongholds of local government and the established church, carried a counteroffensive into the strongholds of the new liberal manufacturing class, namely, the factories and the mines.

Tories became champions of the industrial workers. Landed gentlemen, of whom the most famous was Lord Ashley, later seventh Earl of Shaftesbury, took the lead in publicizing the social evils of a rapid and even ruthless industrialization. They received some support from a few humanitarian industrialists; indeed, the early legislation tended to follow practices already established by the best or strongest business firms. A Factory Act of 1833 forbade the labor of children less than nine years old in the textile mills. It was the first effective piece of legislation on the subject because it provided for paid inspectors and procedures for enforcement. An act of 1842 initiated significant regulation in the coal mines; the employment underground of women and girls, and of boys under ten, was forbidden.

The greatest victory of the working classes came in 1847 with the Ten Hours Act, which limited the labor of women and children in all industrial establishments to ten hours a day. Thereafter men commonly worked only ten hours also, since the work of men, women, and young people was too closely coordinated for the men to work alone. The Liberal John Bright, Quaker and cotton magnate, called the Ten Hours Act “a delusion practiced on the working classes.” To regulate the hours of labor was contrary to the accepted principles of laissez-faire, economic law, the free market, freedom of trade, and individual liberty for employer and worker. Yet the Ten Hours Act stood, and British industry continued to prosper.

Gathering their strength, the Whig-liberal-radical combination established in 1838 an Anti-Corn Law League. Wage earners objected to the Com Laws because the tariff on grain imports kept up the price of food. Industrial employers objected to them because, in keeping up food prices, they also kept up wages and the cost of industrial production in England, thus working to England’s disadvantage in the export trade. Defenders of the Com Laws argued that protection of agriculture was necessary to maintain the natural landowning aristocracy of the country, but they also sometimes used more widely framed economic arguments, affirming that Britain should preserve an economic balance between industry and farming and avoid becoming too exclusively dependent on imported food. The issue became a straight contest between the industrialists, acting with working-class support, and the aristocratic and predominantly Tory landowning interest. The Anti-Com Law League, whose headquarters were at Manchester, operated like a modern political party. It had plenty of money, supplied by large donations from manufacturers and small ones from laboring people. It sent lecturers on tour, agitated in the newspapers, and issued a stream of polemical pamphlets and educational books. It held political teas, torchlight processions, and open-air mass meetings. The pressure proved irresistible and received a final impetus from a famine in Ireland. It was a Tory government, headed by Sir Robert Peel, which in 1846 yielded before so vociferous a demand.

The repeal of the Com Laws in 1846 stands as a symbol of the change that had come over England. It reaffirmed the revolutionary consequences of the Reform Bill of 1832. Industry was now a governing element in the country. Free trade was henceforth the rule. Great Britain, in return for the export of manufacturers, became deliberately dependent on imports for its very life. It was committed henceforth to an international and even worldwide economic system. The first to undergo the Industrial Revolution, possessing mechanical power and methods of mass production, the British could produce yam and cloth, machine tools and railroad equipment, more efficiently and more cheaply than any other people. In Britain, the early industrial workshop of the world, people would pour increasingly into mine, factory, and city; live by selling manufactures, coal, shipping, and financial services to the other peoples of the earth; and obtain raw cotton, rare ores, meat, cereals, and thousands of lesser but still vital necessities from the rest of the earth in exchange. The welfare of Britain depended on the maintenance of a freely exchanging worldwide economic system and, as always, on the British navy’s control of the sea.

57. TRIUMPH OF THE WEST EUROPEAN BOURGEOISIE

In general, the decades following 1830 may be thought of as a kind of golden age of the West-European bourgeoisie, or what in English would be called the upper middle class. In the older meaning, in French, a bourgeois had been someone who was not of the nobility but enjoyed an income from business, a profession, or the ownership of property. After the French Revolution, and even more after 1830, the word took on new meanings, not all of them consistent. Artists, literary people, and old-line aristocrats might disdain the bourgeois as a person of uncultivated tastes, supposedly interested only in making money. From another point of view, shared by social theorists and working-class leaders, the bourgeois was someone who could hire the labor of other people for business enterprises, recreational activities, or household service. In a word, the bourgeois was the employer. In any case, the bourgeoisie and the aristocracy tended to become more alike in the nineteenth century in their daily pursuits and style of life, and to draw income from the possession of income-producing property or capital. The bourgeoisie, formerly identified in contrast to the nobility, was now identified in contrast to the working class, that is, those whose whole income depended on daily labor in shops, offices, farms, or factories.

The reigning liberal doctrine was the “stake in society” theory; those who govern should have something to lose. In the France of the July Monarchy (1830-1848), only about one adult male in 30 had the vote. In the Britain of the first Reform Bill (1832-1867), one man in eight could vote for a member of the House of Commons. In France only the most well-to-do were enfranchised; in Britain, virtually the whole middle class, which, however, long supported members of the aristocracy for the highest public positions. In Britain the continuation of the Tory landed interest in politics somewhat blunted the edge of capitalist and managerial rule, resulting in the passage of significant legislation for the protection of industrial labor. In France the aristocratic landed interest, weaker and less public spirited than in England, lost much of its influence by the Revolution of 1830, and less was done to relieve the condition of labor.

The bourgeois age left its mark on Europe in many ways. For one thing, western Europe continued to accumulate capital and build up its industrial plant. National income was constantly rising, but a relatively small share went to the laboring class and a relatively large share went to owners of capital. This meant that less was spent on consumers’ goods—housing, clothing, food, recreation—and that more was saved and available for reinvestment. New stock companies were constantly formed, and the law of corporations was amended, allowing for the extension of corporate enterprise to new fields. The factory system spread from Britain to the Continent and within Britain from the textile industry to other lines of production. The output of iron, a good index to economic advancement in this phase of industrialism, rose about 300 percent in Great Britain between 1830 and 1848 and about 65 percent in France between 1830 and 1845. (All the German states combined, at the latter date, produced about a tenth as much iron as Great Britain and less than half as much as France.) Railroad building began in earnest after 1840. In 1840 Samuel Cunard put four steamships into regular transatlantic service. Much capital was exported; as early as 1839 an American estimated that Europeans (mainly British) owned $200,000,000 worth of stocks in American companies. Such investments financed the purchase of British and other goods and helped to rivet together a world economic system, in which western Europe and especially England took the lead, with other regions remaining in a somewhat subordinate status.

The Frustration and Challenge of Labor

The bourgeois age had the effect also of estranging the world of labor. The state in Britain and France was as near as it has ever been to what Karl Marx was soon to call it—a committee of the bourgeois class. Already in France people spoke worriedly of the prolétaires, those at the bottom of society, who had nothing to lose. Republicans in France, radical democrats in Britain, felt cheated and imposed upon in the 1830s and 1840s. They had in each country forced through a virtual revolution by their insurrections and demonstrations and then in each country had been left without the vote. Some lost interest in representative institutions. Excluded from government, they were tempted to seek political ends through extragovemmental, which is to say revolutionary or utopian, channels. Social and economic reforms seemed to the average worker far more important, as a final aim, than mere governmental innovations. Workers were told by respected economists that they could not hope to change the system in their own favor. They were tempted, therefore, to destroy the system, to replace it utterly with some new system conceived mainly in the minds of thinkers. They were told by the Manchester School, and by its equivalent in France, that the income of labor was set by ineluctable natural laws, that it was best and indeed necessary for wages to remain low, and that the way to rise in the world was to get out of the laboring class altogether, by becoming the owner of a profitable business and leaving working people about where they were.

The reigning doctrine emphasized the conception of a labor market. The worker sold labor; the employer bought it. The price of labor, or wage, was to be agreed upon by the two individual parties. The price would naturally fluctuate according to changes in supply and demand. When a great deal of a certain kind of labor was required, the wage would go up until new persons moved into the market offering more labor of this type, with the result that something like the old wage would again be established. When no labor was needed, none should be hired, and persons who could not sell labor might then subsist for a time by poor relief.

The new Poor Law of 1834 was especially repugnant to the British working class. It corrected crying evils of the old poor laws that had left millions of people in habitual poverty but did nothing constructive to relieve productive workers suffering from occasional or cyclical unemployment. The new law followed the stem precepts of the dismal science; its main principle was to safeguard the labor market by making relief more unpleasant than any job. It granted relief only to persons willing to enter a workhouse, or poorhouse; and in these establishments the sexes were segregated and life was in other ways made noticeably less attractive than in the outside world. The workers considered the new law an abomination. They called the work-houses “bastilles.” They resented the whole conception of a labor market, in which labor was to be bought and sold (or remain unsold) like any other commodity. The fluctuating, cyclical labor market contributed to the social instability of working-class families and may also have created new tensions between women and men. Court records from early nineteenth-century England suggest that violent family disputes became more common when women earned significant portions of the working family’s household income or found work more readily than their unemployed husbands; such situations challenged the traditional relations in English family life, though women almost always received lower wages than men.

In the long run it would be the increase in productivity that would improve the condition of the workers. Meanwhile the friends of the working class offered two means of escape. One was to improve the position of labor in the market. This led to the formation of labor unions for control of the labor supply and collective bargaining with employers. Such unions, illegal in France, were barely legal in Great Britain after 1825, though it was still illegal in both countries to strike. The other means of escape was to repudiate the whole idea of a market economy and of the capitalist system. It was to conceive of a system in which goods were to be produced for use, not for sale; and in which working people should be compensated according to need, not according to the requirements of an employer. This was the basis of most forms of nineteenth-century socialism.

Socialism and Chartism

Socialism spread rapidly among the working classes after 1830. In France it blended with revolutionary republicanism. There was a revival of interest in the great Revolution and the democratic Republic of 1793. Cheap reprints of the writings of Robespierre began to circulate in the working-class quarters of Paris. Robespierre was now seen as a people’s hero. The socialist Louis Blanc, for example, who in 1839 published his Organization of Work recommending the formation of “social workshops,” also wrote a long history of the French Revolution, in which he pointed out the egalitarian ideals that had inspired the National Convention in 1793. In Britain, as befitted the different background of the country, socialistic ideas blended in with the movement for further parliamentary reform. This was advanced by the working-class group known as the Chartists, from the People’s Charter which they drafted in 1838.

Chartism was far more of a mass movement than the French socialism of the day. Only a few Chartists were clearly socialists in their own minds. But all were anticapitalistic. All could agree that the first step toward social reform must be to win working-class representation in Parliament. The Charter of 1838 consisted of six points. It demanded (1) the annual election of the House of Commons by (2) universal suffrage for all adult males, through (3) a secret ballot and (4) equal electoral districts; and it called for (5) the abolition of property qualifications for membership in the House of Commons, which perpetuated the old idea that Parliament should be composed of gentlemen of independent income, and urged instead (6) the payment of salaries to the elected members of Parliament, in order that people of small means might serve. A convention composed of delegates sent by labor unions, mass meetings, and radical societies all over the country met in London in 1839. Convention was an ominous word, with French revolutionary and even terrorist overtones; some members of this British convention regarded it as the body really representing the people and favored armed violence and a general strike, while others stood only for moral pressure upon Parliament.

A petition bearing over a million signatures, urging acceptance of the Charter, was submitted to the House of Commons. The violent and revolutionary wing, or “physical force” Chartists, precipitated a wave of riots which were effectively quelled by the authorities. In 1842 the petition was again submitted. This time, according to the best estimate, it was signed by 3317,702 persons. Since the entire population of Great Britain was about 19 million, it is clear that the Charter, whatever the exact number of signatures, commanded the explicit adherence of half the adult males of the country. The House of Commons nevertheless rejected the petition by 287 votes to 49. It was feared that political democracy would threaten property rights and the whole economic system as they then existed. The Chartist movement gradually died down in the face of firm opposition by the government and the business classes and was weakened by mutual fears and disagreements among its own supporters. It had not been entirely fruitless; for without popular agitation and the publicizing of working-class grievances, the Mines Act of 1842 and the Ten Hours Act of 1847 might not have been enacted. These measures in turn alleviated the distress of industrial workers and kept alive a degree of confidence in the future of the economic system. Chartism revived briefly in 1848, as will be seen in the next chapter; but in general, in the 1840s, British working people turned from political agitation to the forming and strengthening of labor unions by which they could deal directly with employers without having to appeal to the government. Not until 1867 was the suffrage extended in Great Britain, and it took about 80 years to realize the full program of the Charter of 1838, except for the annual election of Parliament, for which there soon ceased to be any demand.

It is not easy to summarize the history of Europe between 1815 and 1848. Among all the forces set free by the French and Industrial revolutions—liberalism, conservatism, nationalism, republicanism, socialism, feminism, democracy—no stabilization had been achieved. No international system had been created; Europe had instead fallen increasingly into two political camps, which represented both geographical and ideological divisions in nineteenth-century European societies. In general, the political ideas of classical liberalism advanced most rapidly in the nations of western Europe, whereas eastern Europe was mostly dominated by three autocratic monarchies. Western Europe generally adhered more closely to the principles of nationality; governments in central and eastern Europe still opposed them. The countries of northwestern Europe were growing collectively richer, more industrialized, more liberal, more bourgeois. Middle-class people in Germany, central Europe, and Italy (as well as in Spain and Portugal) did not usually enjoy the dignities and emoluments that they enjoyed in Great Britain or France. But the industrializing societies in northwestern Europe had not solved their social problem; their whole material civilization rested upon a restless and sorely tried working class. Everywhere there was repression, in varying degree, and everywhere apprehension, more in some places than in others; but there was also hope, confidence in the progress of an industrial and scientific society, and faith in the unfinished liberal program of the rights of individuals. The result was the general Revolution of 1848.