Chapter19

DEMOCRACY, ANTI-IMPERIALISM, AND THE ECONOMIC CRISIS AFTER THE FIRST WORLD WAR

96. The Advance of Democracy after 1919

97. The German Republic and the Spirit of Locarno

98. Anti-Imperialist Movements in Asia

99. The Great Depression: Collapse of the World Economy

96. THE ADVANCE OF DEMOCRACY AFTER 1919

We have followed events in the Soviet Union in detail to about the year 1939 but have left the story of Europe and the rest of the world at the signing of the peace treaties of 1919. We turn now to the wider history of political and economic change during the period of just 20 years that elapsed between the formal close of the First World War in 1919 and the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. In these 20 years the world made a dizzy passage from confidence to disillusionment and from hope to fear. It went through a few years of superficial prosperity, abruptly followed by unparalleled economic disaster. For a time, in the 1920s, democracy and democratic reforms seemed to be advancing; then, in the difficult economic conditions of the 1930s, dictatorship began to spread in countries that had earlier tried to move toward greater democracy. Let us first examine the apparent triumphs of democracy and the growing opposition to European imperialism in the 1920s, turn next to the devastating worldwide effects of the Great Depression that began in 1929, and then, in the following chapter, trace the new conflicts and rising dangers of the 1930s.

The first years following the war were troubled. The victors and losers alike faced serious difficulties in reconversion from war to peace. Veterans demobilized from the huge armies found themselves unemployed and psychologically restless. Farms and factories geared to maximum production during the war faced a sudden disappearance of markets. They produced more than could now be sold, so that the war was followed by a sharp postwar depression, which, however, had run its course by 1922. Basically, the economic position even of the victors was seriously damaged, for the war had disjointed the world of 1914, in which industrial western Europe had lived by exchange with eastern Europe and with overseas countries.

Gains of Democracy and Social Democracy

The war. President Wilson had said, was fought to make the world safe for democracy. Political democracy, to be sure, now made numerous advances. The new states that emerged from the war all adopted liberal democratic principles such as written constitutions and universal suffrage. Democracy made advances even in countries that had long been in large measure democratic. Great Britain, for example, dropped the last barriers to universal male suffrage in 1918. The most conspicuous innovation in many countries was the growing enfranchisement of women. We have seen how the women’s suffrage movement in Great Britain achieved an important breakthrough in 1918, when women received a somewhat restricted right to vote; in 1928 the restrictions were dropped and the vote was granted on an equal basis with men. In 1920, through an amendment to the constitution, female suffrage became general in the United States. Women voted also in Germany and in most of the new states of Europe. In the Soviet Union women received the vote on an equal basis with men after the revolution in 1917.

In most European countries the successors of the old prewar socialists gained in strength. With the left wings of the old socialists generally seceding, calling themselves Communists, and affiliated with each other and with Moscow in the Communist International, the European socialists or social democrats were preponderantly parties of peaceable or revisionist Marxism, entirely willing to pursue their political and social goals by parliamentary and legislative methods. Labor unions, with new self-confidence gained from the role they had played in the war, grew in membership, prestige, and importance.

Social legislation that before the war would have seemed radical was now enacted in many places. An eight-hour legal working day became common; and government-sponsored insurance programs against sickness, accident, and old age were either adopted or extended; an act of 1930, in France, insured almost 10 million workers. An air of progressive democracy pervaded Europe and the European world. The social service, or welfare, state, already under way in the late nineteenth century, was becoming more firmly established.

Only in Italy in the early postwar years, of the states that might have been expected to continue their prewar democratic gains, did democracy receive a sharp setback. Italy had been a parliamentary state since 1861 and had introduced a democratic male suffrage in the elections of 1913. In 1919 the Italians held their second such elections. But Italian democracy soon abruptly ended. In 1922 an agitator named Benito Mussolini, leading a movement which he called Fascism (thereby adding a new word to the world’s political vocabulary), ended Italian parliamentary government and founded his Fascist regime. Lenin in his way had already created the first single-party state; Mussolini became the first of the dictators of postwar Europe outside the Soviet Union. Fascist Italy in the 1920s was the chief exception in what seemed to be a rising tide of democracy.

The New States of Central and East-Central Europe

In central and east-central Europe—in Germany, in the territory of the former Austro-Hungarian empire, and in the western fringe of former tsarist Russia—new states and new governments struggled to establish themselves. The new postwar states included, besides republican Germany, the four successor states to the Habsburg empire—Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia; and the five states that had broken away from the Russian empire—Poland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (see map, pp. 716-717). The other small states in eastern Europe, Romania, Bulgaria, Greece, and Albania, had already been independent before 1914; their boundaries underwent some modification and their governments underwent considerable reorganization after the war. Turkey, the successor to the Ottoman Empire, was also a new republic.

Allthough many people in all countries had developed nationalist identities and aspirations, the new states in Europe were to a large extent accidents of the war. Nowhere, except possibly in Poland, did they represent a deeply felt, long-maturing, or widespread revolutionary sentiment.

Only an infinitesimal number of Germans in 1914 would have voted for a republic. Even among the nationalities of Austria-Hungary in 1914 few persons would have chosen the complete breakup of the Habsburg empire. The republicans, moderate socialists, agrarians, or nationalists who now found themselves in power had to improvise governments for which there had been little preparation. They had to contend with reactionaries, monarchists, and members of the old aristocracy. They had also to deal with the real revolutionaries, who, inspired by Lenin’s success, hoped to bring about a dictatorship of the proletariat. A Communist revolt broke out in Germany in 1919 but was quickly suppressed; Soviet regimes that were actually set up were soon crushed in Hungary and in the German state of Bavaria; and as late as 1923 there was a Communist uprising in the German state of Saxony.

The new states all embodied the principle of national self-determination, which held that each nationality should enjoy political sovereignty—one nation, one government. But people in this region were and always had been locally intermixed. Each of the new states therefore included minority nationalities; with the exception of an exchange of populations between Greece and Turkey arranged in 1923, there was no thought of the actual physical removal of “alien” groups. Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia were the most composite of the new states. Poland and Czechoslovakia each had many disaffected Germans. In Czechoslovakia the Slovaks resented Czech domination and in Yugoslavia, where the Serbs were in control, Croatian and other separatist movements actively opposed the Serb domination.

Nevertheless, despite economic and nationalist troubles, the new states and governments attempted at the outset to make themselves democratic. All the newly created states were republics except Yugoslavia, where the monarchy was under the older Serbian dynasty. Hungary started out in 1918 as a republic, but the attempt of the Communist leader Béla Kun to found a Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919 brought back the counterrevolutionaries who restored the Habsburg monarchy in principle, though they were prevented by foreign pressure from restoring the king in person. Hungary emerged in 1920 as a monarchy with a perennially vacant throne, under an authoritarian regency exercised by Admiral Horthy. All smaller states of Europe, including Hungary, possessed at least the machinery of democracy until the 1930s; that is, they had constitutions, parliaments, elections, and a diversity of political parties. If civil liberty was sometimes violated, the right to civil liberty was not denied; and if elections were sometimes rigged, they were at least in principle supposed to be free.

Economic Problems of Eastern Europe; Land Reform

Eastern Europe for centuries had been an agrarian region of large landed estates, which supported on the one hand a wealthy landowning aristocracy of almost feudal outlook, and on the other an impoverished mass of agricultural workers with little or no property of their own. The landed aristocracy had been the chief support of the Austro-Hungarian empire and an important pillar of the old order in the tsarist empire and in eastern Prussia. The mass of the rural population through all this region had been free from serfdom only since the middle of the preceding century. The middle class of business and professional people was small except in Austria and Bohemia, the western portion of Czechoslovakia. In general, the whole region was conscious of lagging behind western Europe, not only in industry, factories, railroads, and great cities, but also in literacy, schooling, reading habits, health, death rates, length of life, and material standard of living.

The new states set out to modernize themselves, generally on the model of the West. In addition to introducing democratic and constitutional ideas, they put up protective tariffs, behind which they tried to develop factores and industries of their own. But the new national boundaries created difficulties. Where Europe had 6,000 miles of frontiers in 1913, it had almost 10,000 after the war, and all the increase was in eastern Europe. Goods circulated much less easily. Protected industries in the old agricultural regions produced inefficiently and at high cost. Old and established industries in Austria, Czechoslovakia, and western Poland, cut off by the new frontiers and new tariffs from their former markets, fell upon hard times. The working class of Vienna lived in misery. Vienna, a city of 2 million persons, formerly the capital of an empire of 50 million, was now the capital of a republic of 6 million. In Czechoslovakia the German minority living in the Sudetenland complained that in hard times the German businesspeople and workers, because of government policies, always suffered more than their Czech counterparts. Economically, the carving up of eastern Europe into a dozen independent states was self-defeating.

The greatest of reforms undertaken by the new east-European states was the reform of landownership. Although it far from solved basic economic problems in the area, it did have substantial effect on the pattern of land distribution. The whole traditional agrarian base of society was overturned. The work of the revolutions of 1848, which, in the Habsburg lands, had liberated the peasants but left them landless, was now carried a step further. The example of the Russian Revolution provided a powerful stimulus, for in Russia in 1917 peasants had driven off landlords, and Communists won a hearing among discontented and property-less peasants from Finland to the Balkans. Not until 1929, it should be recalled, did the Soviet Union embark on the collectivization of agriculture; until then, communism appeared to favor the small individual farmer. But it may be said with equal truth that the model for agrarian reform lay in the West, especially in France, the historic land of the small peasant proprietor.

Land reform worked out differently in different countries, but large estates were generally broken into smaller farms throughout the Baltic states and in much of Czechoslovakia. This transformation reflected nationalist sentiment as well as a new social policy because most of the large landowners in all of these places were German. In Romania and Yugoslavia the breakup of large estates, though considerable, was less thorough. In Finland, Bulgaria, and Greece the issue hardly arose, since small landownership was already common. Land reform had least success in Poland and Hungary, where the landed magnates were exceptionally strong and well-rooted.

After the land reforms, political parties of small landholders became the chief democratic force within the various states on the western border of Russia. Often they inclined to socialism, especially since capitalism was associated in their minds with foreign investors and outsiders. On the other hand, the great landowners, the former aristocrats of the prewar empires, whether already expropriated or merely threatened with expropriation, were confirmed in a reactionary outlook. The land reforms did not solve basic economic problems. The new small farms were small, frequently no more than ten acres. The peasant owners lacked capital, agricultural skill, and knowledge of the market. Farm productivity did not rise. In place of old differences between landlord and tenant there developed new differences between the more comfortable peasants and the proletarian hired hands. The continuance of relative poverty, the obstinacy of reactionary upper classes, the new economic tensions among the peasants themselves, the economic distortions produced by numerous tariff walls, and the lack of any sustained tradition of self-government all helped to frustrate the democratic experiments launched in the 1920s.

97. THE GERMAN REPUBLIC AND THE SPIRIT OF LOCARNO

The keystone of Europe was Germany, which also had its revolution in 1918. But it was a revolution without revolutionaries, a negative revolution caused more by the disappearance of the old than by any decisive arrival of the new. The emperor and the High Command of the army, in the last weeks of the war, had bowed out of the picture, leaving it to others to face defeat and humiliation. For a time after November 1918, the political leaders in charge of affairs were mainly Social Democrats. The Social Democrats were Marxists, but their Marxism was the tamed, toned down, and revisionist Marxism that had prevailed for 20 years before the advent of Lenin. They were trade union officials and party managers. They could look back, in 1918, on decades spent in developing labor organizations and building up the Social Democratic party, which in 1912 had become the largest single party in the Reichstag. Now, in 1918, they were a cautious and prudent group, essentially conservative, more anxious to preserve what they had already achieved than to launch audacious new social experiments. Before 1917 the Social Democrats considered themselves well to the Left. But the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and the emergence of a pro-Bolshevik or Communist element in Germany put the Social Democrats in the middle. The middle is an awkward spot, especially in disturbed times; the Communists regarded the Social Democrats as reactionaries, despicable traitors to the working-class movement, whereas the true reactionaries, recruited from old monarchists, army officers, Junker landowners, and big business groups, saw in social democracy, or professed to see in it, a dangerous flirtation with Bolshevism.

The middle group in Germany, the Social Democrats reinforced by the Catholic Center party and others, was more afraid of the Left than of the Right. They were appalled in 1918  and 1919 by the stories brought out of Russia, not merely by fugitive bourgeois or tsarist aristocrats but by refugee Social Democrats, Mensheviks, and anti-Leninist Bolsheviks, many of whom the socialists had long known and trusted in the Second International.

In January 1919 the Spartacists,[1] led by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, attempted to bring about a German proletarian revolution, like that in Russia. Lenin and the Russian Bolsheviks aided them. For a time, there seemed to be a possibility that the Spartacists might succeed in imposing a communist dictatorship of the proletariat in Germany. But the Social Democratic Provisional Government crushed the Spartacist uprising, turning for that purpose to demobilized army officers and volunteer vigilantes recruited from the disbanding army. The Spartacist leaders Liebknecht and Luxemburg were arrested and shot while in police custody. The events of “Spartacus Week” widened the chasm between Social Democrats and Communists.

[1] So named from Spartacus, a Roman slave who led a slave revolt in south Italy in 72 B.C.

Shortly after, elections were held for a National Constituent Assembly. No single party received a majority, but the Social Democrats were the leading party. A coalition of Social Democrats, Center party, and liberal democrats dominated the Assembly. After several months of deliberations at the city of Weimar, in July 1919, a constitution was adopted establishing a democratic republic. The Weimar Republic (as the regime in Germany from 1919  to the advent of Hitler in 1933 is called) was soon threatened ominously from the Right. In 1920 a group of disaffected army officers staged a Putsch, or armed revolt, put the republican government to flight, and attempted to place a puppet of their own, one Dr.

Kapp, at the head of the state. The Berlin workers, by turning off public utilities, stopped the Kapp Putsch and saved the republic. But the Weimar government never took sufficiently firm measures to put down private armed bands led by reactionary or outspokenly antidemocratic agitators. One of these was soon to be Adolf Hitler, who as early as 1923 staged an abortive revolt in Munich. Being democratic and liberal, the Weimar government would not deny the rights of free speech or of election to the Reichstag to even the most radical antidemocratic groups on the Left or the Right.

The Weimar Republic was in principle highly democratic. The constitution embodied all the devices then favored by the most advanced democrats, not only universal suffrage, including the vote for women, but also proportional representation and the initiative, referendum, and recall. But except for the legal eight-hour day and a few other such safeguards to the workers’ welfare (and traditional demands of organized labor) the republic of which the Social Democrats were the main architects in its formative years was remote from anything socialist. No industries were nationalized. No property changed hands. No land laws or agrarian reforms were undertaken, as in the new states of eastern Europe; the East Elbian Junkers remained untouched in their landed estates. The very statues of emperors, kings, princes, and grand dukes were left standing in the streets and squares. Officials, civil servants, police agents, professors, and schoolteachers of old imperial Germany remained at their respective duties. The army, though limited by the Versailles treaty to 100,000 men, remained the old army in miniature, with all its essential organs intact, and lacking only in numbers. In the officer corps the old professional and aristocratic influences remained strong.

Never had there been a revolution so mild, so reasonable, so tolerant. There was no terror, no fanaticism, no stirring faith, no expropriation, and no émigré migration. There had in truth been no revolution at all in the sense in which England, France, the United States, Russia, and other countries either recently or in the more distant past had experienced revolutions.

The German Democracy and Versailles

The supreme question for Europe and the world was how Germany would adjust to the postwar conditions. How would the Germans accept the new internal regime of democracy? How would they accept the new German frontiers and other provisions of the Treaty of Versailles? The two questions were unfortunately interconnected. The Weimar Republic and the Treaty of Versailles were both products of the defeat of Germany in the war. There were many in Germany who favored democracy, notably the numerous Social Democrats, and many more possibly could have been won over to it, given time and favorable conditions. But no one, not even the Social Democrats, accepted the Treaty of Versailles or the new German frontiers as either just or final. If democracy in Germany meant the perpetual acceptance of the treaty without amendment, or if it meant economic distress or hardship which could either reasonably or unreasonably be explained as consequences of the treaty, then democracy would lose such appeal as it had for the Germans.

The German republicans, we have seen, protested against the Versailles treaty before signing, and signed only under pressure. The Allies continued the wartime naval blockade after the armistice; this confirmed, in German eyes, the argument that the Treaty of Versailles was a Diktat, a vengeful, dictated peace. The “war guilt” clause, while it perhaps on the one hand satisfied a peculiar Anglo-American sense of morality, on the other hand offended a peculiar German sense of honor. Neither the reparations demanded of them nor the new frontiers were accepted by the Germans as settled. Reparations they regarded as a perpetual mortgage on their future. They generally expected some day to revise their eastern frontier, recover at least the Polish corridor, and merge with Germanspeaking Austria.

The French lived in fear of the day when Germany would recover. Their plans for their own security and for the collective security of Europe against a German revival had been disappointed. They had been unable to detach the Rhineland from Germany. The United States Senate had refused to ratify the treaty signed at Paris by Wilson, by which the United States was to guarantee France against German invasion in the future. Both Britain and the United States showed a tendency to isolation, to pull away from the Continent, to get back to “normalcy,” to work mainly for a restored trade in which a strong Germany would be a large customer. The League of Nations, of which the United States was not a member and in which every member nation had a veto, offered little assurance of safety to the French. The French began to form alliances against a potentially resurgent Germany with Poland, Czechoslovakia, and other East European states. They insisted also on German payment of reparations. The amount of reparations, left unstated in the treaty, was fixed by a Reparations Commission in 1921 at 132 billion gold marks (the equivalent of $35 billion), a sum that even non-German economists said was more than Germany could possibly pay.

The Weimar government in these circumstances looked to the Soviet Union, which had been no party to the Versailles treaty and claimed no reparations. The Soviet government meanwhile, concluding from the failure of proletarian revolution in Germany and Hungary that the time was not ripe for the sovietizing of Europe, prepared to enter into normal diplomatic relations with established governments. Germany and the Soviet Union, despite ideological repugnance, thus signed the treaty of Rapallo in 1922. In the following years the Soviet Union obtained needed manufactures from Germany, and German factories and workers were kept busy by orders from the Soviets. The German army dispatched officers and technicians to give instruction to the Red Army. Obliged by the Treaty of Versailles to restrict its activities, the German army was in fact able, through its work in Russia and through a number of subterfuges at home, to maintain a high standard of training and technical knowledge of new weapons and equipment.

Reparations, the German Inflation of 1923, Recovery

The French, blocked in the attempt to collect reparations and assisted by the Belgians, in 1923 sent units of the French army to occupy the industrial sites of the Ruhr valley. The Germans responded by general strikes and passive resistance. To sustain the workers the Weimar government paid them benefits, grinding paper money off the printing presses for this purpose. Germany, like other belligerent countries, had suffered from inflation during and after the war; neither the imperial nor the Weimar government had been willing to impose heavier taxes to offset it. But what now swept Germany was different from ordinary inflation. It was of catastrophic and utterly ruinous proportions. Paper money became literally worthless. By the end of 1923 it took over 4 trillion paper marks to equal a dollar.

This inflation brought far more of a social revolution than the fall of the Hohenzollem empire had ever done. Debtors paid off debts in worthless money. Creditors received baskets full of meaningless paper. Salaries even when raised lagged behind the soaring cost of living. Annuities, pensions, proceeds of insurance policies, savings accounts in the banks, income from bonds and mortgages—every form of revenue which had been arranged for at some time in the past, and which often represented the economy, foresight, and personal planning of many years—now turned to nothing. The middle class was pauperized and demoralized. Middle-class people were now materially in much the position of workers and proletarians. Their whole view of life, however, made it impossible for them to identify themselves with the laboring class or to accept its Marxist or socialist ideologies. They had lost faith in society itself, in the future, in the old burgher codes of self-reliance and rational planning of their own lives in an understandable world. A kind of moral void was created, with nothing for them to believe in, hope for, or respect.

The inflation, however, by wiping out all outstanding indebtedness within the country, made it possible, once the losses were written off and accepted, to start up economic production afresh. The United States was persuaded to play a reluctant role, in part because it was demanding the payment of huge war debts by the Allies. The Allies—Britain, France, Belgium—insisted that they could not pay these debts to the United States unless they collected reparations from Germany. In 1924 the Dawes Plan, named for the American Charles G. Dawes, was instituted in Germany to assure the flow of reparations. By the Dawes Plan the French evacuated the Ruhr, the reparations payments were cut down, and arrangements were made for the German republic to borrow abroad. A good deal of American private capital was invested in Germany in the following years, both in German government bonds and in German industrial enterprises. Gradually, so at least it seemed, Germany was put on its feet. For four or five years the Weimar Republic even enjoyed a bustling prosperity, and there was a good deal of new construction in roads, housing, factories, and ocean liners. But the prosperity rested in good measure on foreign loans, and the Great Depression that began in 1929 reopened all the old questions.

The Spirit of Locarno

These years of economic prosperity were years also of relative international calm. Yet none of the fundamental international issues were addressed or resolved. The universal German hatred for the Treaty of Versailles elicited no concessions from the Allies.

Conceivably, had the Allies been willing at this time to amend the treaty by international agreement, they might have taken the wind from the sails of nationalistic rabble-rousers in Germany and so spared themselves much later grief. It may be, however, that no possible concession would have sufficed. The great problem was to prevent a German overthrow of the treaty structure by violence, especially in eastern Europe where the Germans regarded the new frontiers as very much subject to reconsideration. After the Ruhr incident in 1923 and adoption of the Dawes Plan in 1924, a group of moderate and peace-loving men shaped the foreign policy of the principal countries—Gustav Stresemann in Germany, Édouard Herriot and Aristide Briand in France, and Ramsay MacDonald in England.

The charter of the League of Nations provided for international sanctions against potential aggressors. Like the system of congresses after the Peace of Vienna, the League was designed to assure compliance with the peace treaties or at the very least their modification without resort to force. No one expected the League, by any authority of its own, to prevent war between Great Powers; but the League achieved various minor pacifications in the 1920s, and in any case its headquarters at Geneva offered a convenient meeting place in which statesmen could talk.

As a further assurance against war, in 1925, the European powers signed a number of treaties at Locarno, Switzerland. These marked the highest point in international goodwill reached between the two World Wars. Germany signed a treaty with France and Belgium guaranteeing their respective frontiers unconditionally. It signed arbitration treaties with Poland and Czechoslovakia— not guaranteeing these frontiers as they stood but undertaking to attempt changes in them only by international discussion, agreement, or arbitration. France signed treaties with Poland and Czechoslovakia promising military aid if they were attacked by Germany. France thus fortified its policy of balancing German power in the East by its own diplomatic alliances and by supporting the Little Entente, as the alliance of Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania was called. Great Britain “guaranteed”—that is, promised military aid in the event of violation—the frontiers of Belgium and France against Germany. It did not give an equivalent guarantee with respect to Czechoslovakia or Poland. The British policy was based on the view that their security would be threatened by German expansion westward, but not by German expansion to the east. It was on the borders of Czechoslovakia and Poland, 14 years later, that the Second World War began. Had Britain gone along with France in 1925 in guaranteeing these two countries, then abided by the guarantee, the Second World War might possibly have been prevented. On the other hand, no war ever depends on any single decision; it is the accumulation of many decisions that matters.

In 1925 people talked with relief of the “spirit of Locarno.” In 1928 international harmony was again strengthened when the French foreign minister Briand and the United States Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg arranged for the Pact of Paris. Ultimately signed by 65 nations, it condemned recourse to war for the solution of international controversies (though it provided no measures of enforcement).

In the mid-1920s the outlook was therefore full of hope. At Locarno, Germany had of its own volition accepted its borders both east and west, to the extent of abjuring violence and unilateral action even in the east. In 1926 Germany joined the League of Nations. Germany appeared to be a going concern as a democratic republic. Democracy seemed to work, as well as could be expected, in most of the new states of eastern Europe, and Communist Russia itself had halted its postwar revolutionary offensive. The world was again prosperous, or seemed to be. World production was at or above the prewar level. World trade, by 1929, measured in hard money-gold—had almost doubled since 1913. The war and the postwar troubles were remembered as a nightmare from which Europe had finally escaped. It seemed that, after all, the world had been made safe for democracy.

But complacency was shattered by the great world depression, by the growth of a malignant nationalism in Germany, due in part to the depression, and by the assertion of a new militancy in Japan, which also was not unrelated to the depression. But let us turn first to the postwar years in Asia, where new nationalisms and political movements confronted Europe’s colonial empires and challenged its once-dominant position in the global economy.

98. ANTI-IMPERIALIST MOVEMENTS IN ASIA

Resentments in Asia

The peoples of Asia had never been satisfied with the position in which they found themselves after the great European expansion of the nineteenth century. Increasingly they condemned everything associated with “imperialism.” In this respect there was little difference between countries actually governed by Europeans as parts of European empires in the nineteenth century, such as British India, the Netherlands Indies, French Indochina (or the American Philippines), and countries that remained nominally independent under their own government, such as China, Persia, and the Ottoman Empire. In the former, as new national movements began to develop, there was objection to the monopoly of Europeans in the important offices of government. In the latter, there was objection to the special rights and privileges enjoyed by Europeans, the widespread impounding of customs revenues to pay foreign debts, the special privileges for foreigners in Turkey, the extraterritorial rights in China, and the spheres of influence in Persia which divided the country between British and Russians.

By imperialism, in either case, aroused Asians meant a system whereby the affairs of their own country were conducted, its resources exploited, and its people employed for the benefit of foreigners, Europeans, or white people. They meant the system of absentee capitalism, by which the plantations, docks, or factories on which they themselves labored, were the property of owners thousands of miles away whose main interest was a regular flow of profits. They meant the constant threat that an alien civilization would disintegrate and eat away their own ancient cultures. They meant the burden of having to speak a European language or the disagreeable prospect of having to fight in wars originated by Europeans. And they meant the airs of superiority assumed by whites, the race consciousness exhibited by all Westerners, though perhaps most of all by the British and Americans, the color line that was everywhere drawn, the attitudes varying between contempt and condescension, the relation of native “boy” and European “sahib.” Imperialism to them signified the gentlemen’s clubs in Calcutta to which no Indian was ever admitted, the hotels in Shanghai from which Chinese were carefully kept out, or the park benches in various cities on which no “native” could ever sit. In deeper psychology, as well as in economics and politics, the revolt of self-conscious Asians was a rebellion against an imperial system that reduced them to social inferiority and humiliation in their own societies.

The revolt against the West was generally ambivalent or two-sided. It was a revolt against Western supremacy; but at the same time, in most cases those who revolted meant to learn from and imitate the West in order that, by taking over Western science, industry, organization, and other sources of Western power, they might preserve their own identity and achieve political and economic equality with the Western nation-states. Anti-imperialist movements and intellectuals thus borrowed from Western culture even as they vehemently rejected Western ideologies that assumed the superiority of European institutions or races.

The crisis in Asia had broken out with the Russo-Japanese War, when an Asian people in 1905 defeated a great European power for the first time. In 1906 revolution began in Persia, leading to the assembly of the first majlis, or parliament. In 1908 the Young Turks staged a successful revolution in Constantinople and summoned a parliamentary assembly to represent all regions then in the Ottoman Empire. In 1911 the revolutionists in China, led by Sun Yat-sen, overthrew the Manchu (or Qing) dynasty and proclaimed the Chinese Republic. In each case the rebels charged their old monarchs—shah, sultan, emperor— with subservience to Western imperialists. In each case they summoned national assemblies on the prevailing democratic model of Europe, and they proposed to revive, modernize, and westernize their countries to the degree necessary to avoid domination by the West.

First World War and Russian Revolution

In the First World War almost all the Asian peoples were somehow involved. The Ottoman Empire, allied with Germany, immediately repudiated all the capitulations, or special legal rights of Europeans. In Persia, where Russian and British intervention in 1907 had blocked the developing movement for constitutional reform, there was a concerted attempt to maintain Persian neutrality in the war and to get rid of the foreign spheres of influence that Russia and Britain had imposed through agreements between themselves. Persian territory became a battleground of British, Russian, and Turkish forces; and a large number of Persians died from wartime violence, disruption, and disease. China, which joined the Allies, attempted at the peace conference to have the extraterritorial rights in China abolished. We have seen how this request of the Chinese Republic was refused, and how the Allies instead transferred many of the prewar German concessions to the Japanese. The dependent regions of Asia, the Dutch, French, and British possessions, were stimulated economically by the war. The Netherlands Indies, though remaining neutral, increased its output of foodstuffs, oil, and raw materials. India developed its steel industry and textile manufactures and contributed over a million soldiers, combat and service troops, to the British cause. All the dependent regions were stirred by Woodrow Wilson’s call to make the world safe for democracy.

The home governments made concessions. They were naturally afraid to go too far; they insisted that their subject peoples were not yet capable of self-government. Huge investments were at stake, and the whole world economy depended on the continuing flow of raw materials from tropical and subtropical countries. But they did compromise. In 1916 the Dutch created a legislative assembly to advise the governor general of the Indies; half its members were Indonesians. In 1917 the British agreed to a measure of self-government in India; an Indian legislative assembly was set up with 140 members, of whom 100 were elected, and in the provinces of British India the number of elected representatives and of local Indian officials was increased. The French in 1922 provided for a somewhat similar assembly in Indochina. Thus all three colonial powers at about the same time began to experiment with consultative bodies whose membership was partly elective and partly appointive, partly non-European and partly European. The United States introduced an elected assembly in the Philippine Islands in 1916.

The Russian Revolution added a new stimulus to unrest in Asia. The Bolsheviks denounced not only capitalism but also imperialism. In Marxist-Leninist ideology imperialism was an aspect of capitalism, which Lenin had called the “highest” or “final” phase of capitalist societies. Colonial peoples also tended to identify the two, not so much for Marxist reasons as because modern capitalism was a foreign or “imperialist” phenomenon in colonial countries, where the ownership and the management of large enterprises were foreign. Nationalism in Asia, the movement for independence or for more equality with the West, thus easily shaded off into socialism and the denunciation of capitalist exploitation. The Bolsheviks were quick to see the advantages for themselves in this situation. As it became clear that the world revolution, as expected by Lenin, would not soon come to pass in Europe, the Russian Communists turned to Asia as the theater in which world capitalism might be attacked by a great flanking movement. In September 1920 a “congress of oppressed Eastern peoples” assembled at Baku, on the coast of the Caspian Sea. Zinoviev, head of the Communist International, called for war upon “the wild beasts of British capitalism.” In the following years a few future radical leaders from Asian countries sojourned in Moscow. Meanwhile, Communists dispatched from Moscow stirred up the discontents which existed, quite without Russian instigation, all over Asia.

The postwar situation in Asia was thus extremely fluid. People who were not Communists hailed communism as a liberating force. Anti-Westerners declared that their countries must westernize, at least in certain aspects of science, technology, and social organization. Nationalism overshadowed all other “isms.” In the Indian National Congress rich Indian capitalists worked together with socialist leaders in relative harmony so long as the common enemy was the British.

The Turkish and Persian Revolutions

The most immediately successful of the revolutionary movements took place in Turkey. The Young Turks at first, in 1908, had meant to prevent the further dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. This proved to be impossible. In the Balkan wars of 1912-1913 the Ottoman power was almost totally excluded from the Balkan peninsula. In the First World War, in which the Turks were on the losing side, the Arabs with a great deal of British assistance broke away. After the war, in 1921, the Greeks invaded the Anatolian peninsula. They dreamed of a greater Greece embracing both sides of the Aegean. Europeans still regarded Turkey as the sick man of Europe, the Ottoman state as doomed to extinction, and the Turkish people as barbarous and incompetent. The Allies had agreed in 1915 to partition Turkey; and after the war the Western powers favored the Greek invasion. Italian and French forces occupied parts of Anatolia; and Italians, French, and British undertook to take Constantinople from Turkish rule, though its disposition remained uncertain. In these circumstances a powerful army officer named Mustapha Kemal rallied Turkish national resistance. Within two years, and with aid from the Soviet Union, the Turks drove out the Greeks and the Western Allies. They affirmed their hold on the Anatolian peninsula, and on both shores of the Straits, including Constantinople, which in 1930 was renamed Istanbul.

The Nationalists, under the energetic drive of Mustapha Kemal, now put through a sweeping revolution. They abolished the sultanate and the caliphate, since the sultan had compromised himself with foreigners and was also, as caliph or commander of the faithful, a religious leader for all Islam and hence a conservative link with the past. The Turkish Republic was promulgated in 1923.

Whereas the Ottoman Empire had been a composite organization made up of diverse religious communities, among which the Muslims were the ruling group, the Turkish Republic was conceived as a national state in which the “people,” that is, the Turkish people, were sovereign. Universal suffrage was introduced, along with a parliament, a ministry, and a president with strong powers. Non-Turks in Asia Minor now became “foreign” in a way they had not been before. We have seen that the Armenians were deported and massacred during the First World War. The other large non-Turkish and Christian people were the Greeks. After the war about 1.4 million Greeks either fled or were officially transported from Asia Minor to Greece and in exchange some 400,000 Turks residing in northern Greece were transported to Turkey. The exchange of populations caused great hardship, it uprooted most of the Greek population that had lived in Asia Minor since antiquity, and it overwhelmed the impoverished Greek kingdom by obliging it suddenly to absorb a mass of destitute refugees, who were a quarter as numerous as the population of Greece itself. But it enabled the Turkish Republic to acquire a relatively homogeneous population (except for a Kurdish minority in eastern Turkey), and it ended minority disputes between Greece and Turkey until new problems arose after the Second World War.

For the first time in any Muslim country the spheres of government and religion were sharply distinguished. The Turkish Republic affirmed the total separation of church and state. It declared religion to be a private belief, and it tolerated all religions. Government was reorganized on secular and nonreligious principles stemming from the French Revolution. The law of the Qur’an was thrust aside. The new law was modeled on the Swiss Code, the most recently codified European legislation, itself derived from the Code Napoleon.

Mustapha Kemal urged women to put aside the veil, to come out of the harem, to vote, and to occupy public office. He made polygamy a crime. Men he required by law to discard the fez. He fought against the fez as Peter the Great had fought against the beard, and for the same reason, seeing in it the symbol of backward habits. The hat, “headgear of civilization,” correspondingly became the symbol of progress. The people shifted to Western dress. The Western alphabet became mandatory; literate Turks had to learn to read again, and illiteracy was reduced. The Western calendar and the metric system were adopted. Turks were required to assume hereditary family surnames, like Westerners; Kemal himself took the name Atatürk, or Great Turk. The capital was moved from Istanbul to Ankara. The republic put up a high tariff. In 1933 it adopted a five-year plan for economic development. The Turks, having shaken off foreign influence, were determined not to become again dependent on Western capital or capitalism. The five-year plan provided for mines, railroads, and factories, mainly under government ownership. At the same time, while willing to accept Russian aid against the Western powers, the republic had no patience with communism, which it suppressed. The Turks wanted a modern Turkey—by and for the Turks.

Persia experienced a different kind of political revolution, but there were comparable attempts to reduce the influence of foreign powers.

When the British tried to establish a postwar colonial protectorate there in 1919, they were stymied by strong national resistance. Meanwhile, the new Soviet regime withdrew from Persia and renounced all claims of the previous Russian government. In 1921 an army officer named Reza Khan overthrew the older ruling Qajar dynasty and in 1925 became shah (with British and Soviet support). Henceforth known as Reza Shah Pahlavi, he established a repressive regime that sought to modernize the country and to break away from various agreements with the British government. Earlier concessions, capitulations, and spheres of influence were abolished, and Reza Shah renegotiated the British oil contracts. There were also efforts to assert greater control over foreign corporations and to collect more taxes, though revenues still fell below what the shah hoped to extract. Beginning in 1935, the government affirmed its national identity by changing the country’s official international name to Iran, which had for some time been used within the nation itself.

The National Movement in India: Gandhi and Nehru

India at the close of the First World War was on the verge of revolution against British rule. Discontented Indians looked for leadership to Mohandas K. Gandhi, the Mahatma, or Holy One, who in the following decades, though hardly typical of modern Asia, attained a worldwide eminence as the champion of subjected peoples. Gandhi had been educated in England in the 1890s and had practiced law in South Africa, where he became aware of racial discrimination as a worldwide problem. In India, after 1919, he led a movement for self-government and economic and spiritual independence from Great Britain. He also sought greater tolerance within India itself, both between Hindus and Muslims, and between upper-caste Hindus and the depressed outcastes and untouchables. The weapons he favored were those of nonviolence, passive resistance, civil disobedience, and the boycott. He took to self-imposed fasts and hunger strikes to cope with his British jailers and later with the Indians themselves.

Gandhi and his most loyal followers, as the troubles mounted, refused to be elected to or take part in the partially representative institutions that the British had cautiously introduced. They also undermined the British economic position in India by refusing to buy or use goods imported from England. The latter touched the British in a sensitive spot. Before the World War half of all exports of British cotton cloth went to India, but by 1932 this proportion had fallen to a quarter. Gandhi turned against all industrialism, even the mechanized industry that was growing up in India itself. He put aside Western costume, took to using a spinning wheel and living on goat’s milk, urged Indian peasants to revive their old handicrafts, and appeared on solemn occasions clad in no more than a homespun loincloth. By the high level of his principles Gandhi made himself an inspiration to many groups that differed on more mundane matters. Even in the West he was regarded as one of the great spiritual leaders of all time.

India was very much divided within, and the British maintained that because of these divisions the ending of British rule would precipitate anarchy. There were Hindus and Muslims, between whom clashes and terrorist outrages were chronic. (Gandhi was himself assassinated in 1948 by an anti-Muslim Hindu fanatic.) There were the hundreds of minor potentates of the native states. There were Indian capitalists and wealthy industrialists, like the Tata family, and growing masses of proletarians produced by Indian industrialization. There were the higher castes and the outcastes, and there were hundreds of millions of peasants living in rural poverty. In politics, there were those who demanded full independence, boycotted the British, and spent years in jail, as did Gandhi and his more practical-minded but devoted follower Jawaharlal Nehru; and there were the moderates who believed that they might best advance the welfare of India by accepting government office, cooperating with the British, and working for dominion status within the British Empire. Marxism exerted a strong appeal, not indeed on the spiritual and pacific Gandhi, but on Nehru and even many of the less radical leaders. In the 1920s the Soviet Union stood in their eyes for the overthrow of imperialism; in the 1930s it pointed the way toward economic development by its adoption of five-year plans. For a people wishing to move from poverty to industrial strength and higher living standards without loss of time, and without dependence on foreign capital and capitalism, the Soviet Union with its economic planning seemed to offer a more appropriate model and more practical lessons than the rich democracies of the West, with their centuries of gradual progress behind them.

The 20 years between world wars were years of repeated disturbance, rioting and repression, sporadic violence despite the exhortations of Gandhi, conferences and round tables, reforms and promises of reform, with a shift in the 1930s toward more participation of Indians in the affairs of the Indian empire. Independence was not won until after the Second World War; with it took place a partition of the Indian subcontinent into two new nations, a predominantly Hindu India and a predominantly Muslim Pakistan.

In the Netherlands Indies, where the nationalist movement was less developed, the interwar years were quieter than in India. A serious rebellion, in which communists took part, broke out in 1922 but was suppressed by the Dutch. The peoples of the Indonesian archipelago were almost as diverse as those of India. Only the Dutch empire had brought them politically together. Opposition to the Dutch gave them a common program. In 1937 the legislative council petitioned for dominion status. But not until after the Second World War and the failure of a military effort to repress the nationalists did the Dutch, in 1949, concede independence.

The Chinese Revolution: The Three Peoples Principles

The Chinese Revolution had opened in 1911 with the overthrow of the Manchu (Qing) dynasty, which itself had belatedly begun to introduce modernizing reforms. The Chinese Republic was proclaimed, but the first immediate result was the establishment in Peking (now Beijing) of a military dictatorship exercised by General Ytian Shih-kai, who had been a close adviser to the Manchus and who, until his death in 1916, never ceased to cast covetous eyes on the now empty imperial throne itself. In the south the veteran revolutionary Dr. Sun Yat-sen reorganized the Guomindang (National People’s, or Nationalist party), successor to the prerevolutionary network of underground societies of which he had been the chief architect.[2] Sun, elected the first president of the republic by a revolutionary provisional assembly, resigned within a few months in favor of General Yüan, who he mistakenly believed would unite the country under a parliamentary regime. Subsequently, in the confusion that followed the struggle for power in Peking after Yüan’s death in 1916, Sun was proclaimed president of a rival government in the south at Canton (now Guangzhou), which exercised a nominal power over the southern provinces. Not until 1928 could any government have any basis for claiming actual rule over China—and even then, there were important exceptions. For most of these years the country was virtually in the hands of contending war lords, each of whom pocketed the customary taxes in his own locality, maintained his own army, and recognized no superior authority.

[2] The Pinyin system, adopted in 1979 by The People’s Republic of China, is now widely used for the transliteration of Chinese into languages like English that use the Latin alphabet, replacing the older Wade-Giles spelling. Kuomintang is now rendered as Guomindang, Mao Tse-tung as Mao Zedong, Peking as Beijing, Nanking as Nanjing, Chou En-lai as Zhou Enlai, Teng Hsiao-p’ing as Deng Xiaoping, and so on. For a few names like Sun Yat-sen or Chiang Kai-shek the original spellings are often retained.

It was Sun Yat-sen who best expressed the ideas of this phase of the Chinese Revolution. born in 1867 and educated under American influence in the Hawaiian Islands, he had received a medical degree at Hong Kong, had traveled and lived around the world, studied Western ideas, lectured to Chinese audiences in America, collected money for his conspiracies against the Manchus, and had returned from Europe to take part in the revolution. Shortly before his death in 1925 Sun gathered the lectures which he had been expounding for years into a book, The Three People’s Principles. The book sheds much light on the revolt of China and of all Asia against the supremacy of the West.

The three people’s principles, according to Sun Yat-sen, were democracy, nationalism, and livelihood. Livelihood meant social welfare and economic reform—a more equitable distribution of wealth and land, a gradual end to poverty and unjust economic exploitation. By nationalism Dr. Sun meant that the Chinese who had always lived mainly in the clan and family had now to leant the importance of the nation and the state. They were in fact a great nation, he taught, the world’s most cultured, and had once prevailed from the mouth of the Amur to the East Indies. But they had never been cohesive. The Chinese had been “a sheet of loose sand”; they must now “break down individual liberty and become pressed together into an unyielding body like the firm rock which is formed by the addition of cement to sand.”

By democracy Sun Yat-sen meant the sovereignty of the people. Like Rousseau, he gave little attention to voting, elections, or parliamentary processes. He believed that while the people were sovereign, the able should govern. Adhering in this respect to traditional Confucian teachings, he believed that government should be conducted by experts, a principle he criticized the West for neglecting. Dr. Sun felt a warm sympathy for Lenin. Yet he was by no means a doctrinaire Marxist. Marxism he thought inapplicable to China, arguing that the Chinese must take Marxism as they took all other Western ideas, avoiding slavish imitation, using, adapting, amending, or rejecting as they saw fit. China had no native capitalism in any Marxist or Western sense. The “capitalists” in China, he said, were owners of land, especially in cities such as Shanghai, where the coming of Westerners had raised land values to dizzy heights. Hence if China could get rid of imperialism it would take a long step toward getting rid of capitalism also; it could begin to equalize landowning and confiscate unearned rents. Since China, he observed, had no true capitalists, the state itself must undertake capitalist and industrial development. This would require loans of foreign capital and the services of foreign managers and technicians, adding another reason why the Chinese state, to maintain control, must be strong.

With Sun Yat-sen, in short, democracy easily shaded off into a theory of benevolent and constructive dictatorship. Marxism, communism, socialism, “livelihood,” the planned society, welfare economics, and antiforeign and anti-imperialist sentiment were all mixed together—in some ways as many of the ideas of the Chinese Communists would later be.

The first aim of Sun Yat-sen and of the revolutionists in China was to shake off the “treaty system” that had bound China to outside interests since 1842. In this respect the Paris peace conference had been disappointing; the Chinese not only failed to obtain the abolition of Western privileges and extraterritorial rights but also could not win back the former German concessions that the Japanese had taken over during the war. Widespread student and worker demonstrations directed against the Western powers took place at the time of the Paris peace conference on May 4, 1919. The May Fourth movement heightened anti-foreign consciousness.

As the Western powers proved obdurate, Sun and the Guomindang turned to Russia. They declared the Russian and Chinese revolutions to be two aspects of the same worldwide movement of liberation. The Chinese Communist party, organized in 1921, became allied with the Guomindang in 1923. The latter accepted Russian Communist advisers, notably the veteran revolutionist Borodin, whom Sun Yat-sen had known years before in the United States. The Soviet Union, following its strategy of outflanking world capitalism by penetrating Asia, sent military equipment, army instructors, and party organizers into China. It also surrendered the Russian concessions and extraterritorial rights acquired in China by the tsars. The Chinese policy of friendliness to Russia began to produce the hoped-for effects; the British, to draw China from Russia, gave up a few of their lesser concessions at Hankow and other cities.

China: Nationalists and Communists

The Guomindang, its armies reorganized and strengthened, displayed a fresh vitality and after 1924 launched a military and political offensive. The new offensive was planned by the ever-active Russian advisers, supported by the Chinese Communists, and headed by Chiang Kai-shek, who succeeded to the leadership of the Nationalist party upon Sun’s death in 1925. Chiang’s main objectives were to compel the independent war lords and the regime still holding office in Beijing to accept the authority of a single Nationalist government. By the end of 1928 Chiang’s armies had swept northward, occupied Beijing, and transferred the seat of government to Nanjing. Chiang now exercised at least nominal control over most of China, although effective control was still limited by the recalcitrance of many provincial war lords. The outside powers, acknowledging the accomplishments of the Guomindang, extended diplomatic recognition to the Nanjing government and conceded its right to organize and run the country’s tariff and customs affairs. They also partially surrendered their extraterritorial privileges and pledged to abolish them completely in the near future.

In 1927, while a measure of national unity was being forged in the country, an open break occurred between the Guomindang and its left wing. In the course of the northern military campaign, and particularly in the seizure of Nanjing, popular disturbance and excesses, including the killing of a number of foreigners, had taken place, allegedly fomented by the Communists. These radical disturbances frightened and alienated the wealthier and more conservative element in the Guomindang and jeopardized Chiang’s chief source of financial assistance for his government and army. Chiang himself had never apparently considered the alliance with either the Communists or the Russians as anything more than one of convenience. He now took decisive action, purging Communists and Russian advisers from the party, and executing many people who were affiliated with left-wing groups. Borodin and others fled to Moscow, and a Communist-led uprising in Guangzhou was forcefully suppressed. A number of armed Communist groups fled to the safety of the mountain regions in the south and joined other guerrilla contingents. In that way the Chinese Red Army was formed; among its leaders was Mao Zedong, a former librarian, teacher, newspaper editor, and union organizer, who had been one of the founding members of the party.

Chiang, with the renewed financial and moral support of the Guomindang bankers, resumed the northern offensive. But the original revolutionary impulse of the Guomindang was now dissipated. Made up of men who feared social upheaval and who often regarded their own maintenance in power as their chief goal, it exercised a kind of one-party dictatorship over most of China under Chiang’s leadership. Chiang himself recognized mounting popular dissatisfaction with the reluctance or inability of the party to initiate reforms, but he was busy consolidating the regime and after 1931 he had to contend with Japanese aggression. During these years he developed a deadly hatred for Communists and those who agitated for revolutionary reform.

The Communists, operating in southeast China, fed on popular discontent and drew support from the peasantry by a systematic policy of expropriation and distribution of large landed estates as well as by intensive propaganda. They succeeded in fighting off Chiang’s armies and even in winning over part of his troops. Organizing a network of local soviets, in 1931 they proclaimed a Chinese Soviet Republic in the southeast. When the Nationalist armies succeeded in dislodging them, the Communists, under Mao’s leadership, undertook in 1934-1935 an amazing 6,000-mile march over near-insuperable terrain to north-central Yenan, where they were closer to Soviet supply lines. About 90,000 began the Long March, of which only half survived. They entrenched themselves again, fought off the Nationalist armies, and built up a popular following among the rural masses. With the Japanese invasion of north China under way, they abandoned their revolutionary offensive and pressed Chiang to end the civil war and to create a united front against the Japanese aggressor. Chiang reluctantly consented.

By 1937 an alliance was formed between the Nationalists and the Communists, and the Chinese Red Army was placed under Nationalist control; a united China would face the Japanese. But the uneasy alliance was not to last even until the defeat of Japan in the Second World War. Guomindang and Communists would soon engage in a deadly struggle for power.

Japan: Militarism and Aggression

The Nationalist movement in China caused apprehension in Japan, whose rise as a modern power has already been traced. The Japanese, at least since the Sino-Japanese War of 1895, had looked upon the political weakness and disorder in China as a field for expansion of their own interests, in this scarcely differing from Europeans except that they were closer to the scene. During the First World War they had presented their Twenty-One Demands on China, had taken over the German concessions in Shantung, and had sent troops into eastern Siberia. During the war the industrialization of Japan proceeded rapidly; Japan captured new markets while the Europeans were locked in struggle; and after the war the Japanese remained one of the chief suppliers of textiles for Asia. The Japanese could produce at lower prices than the Europeans, prices at which the penniless masses of Asia were more able to buy. They themselves sustained their standard of living by importing raw materials and selling manufactures. But the Chinese Nationalists hoped to erect a protective tariff; it was for this reason, among others, that they denounced the treaty system, which for almost a century had bound China to international free trade. The Chinese, like the Turks, hoped to industrialize and develop their own country behind a high tariff wall, which would shut out Japanese manufactures as well as others.

During the 1920s the civilian, liberal, Western-oriented element in Japan remained in control of the government. In 1925 universal male suffrage was adopted. Europeans and Americans generally viewed the Japanese with sympathetic approval, as the most progressive of all non-Europeans, the one Asian people who had ably learned to play its part in the advancing worldwide civilization. But there was another facet to Japan. The constitution of 1889 and the parliamentary system were a façade that concealed the true nature of Japanese political power. Only in Japan of all modern countries did a constitutional law prescribe that the war and navy ministers must be active generals or admirals. The diet itself functioned under sharply restricted powers. Ministers governed in the name of the supreme and sacred authority of the emperor, to whom they were alone responsible. Economically, the government’s sponsorship of industrial growth had resulted in a tremendous concentration of economic power in the hands of four family trusts known collectively as the Zaibatsu. The business interests and the civilian political leaders all looked to an expanding empire and growing markets. The most restless group in Japan drew its strength from the nationalist revival which, even before the “opening” of Japan in 1854, had cultivated Shinto, emperor worship, and the way of the warrior as a new and modern way of life. This group was recruited in large part from the old clansmen and samurai, whom the “abolition of feudalism” had uprooted from their accustomed ways and who in many cases found no outlet for their energies in the new regime. Many of these men now served as officers in the army. Often they regarded the West as decadent. They dreamed of the day when Japan would dominate all East Asia.

About 1927 this group began to hold ministries in the Japanese government and to turn Japanese policy into increasingly aggressive and militaristic attitudes toward China. In 1931 Japanese army units in southern Manchuria (where the Japanese had been stationed since defeat of the Russians in 1905), alleging the murder of a Japanese officer at Mukden, seized Chinese arsenals and spread northward over Manchuria. In 1932, charging the Chinese with economic warfare against Japan (Chinese boycotts were in fact damaging the Japanese export trade), the Japanese landed 70,000 troops at Shanghai. They soon withdrew, preferring to concentrate at this stage on the occupation of northern China. They declared Manchuria to be an independent state under an emperor they selected (they chose the last Chinese emperor, the “boy-emperor” Pu Yi, who had been deposed in 1911) and renamed the state Manchukuo.

To protest the Japanese invasion of Manchuria the Chinese appealed to the League of Nations. The League sent a commission of inquiry, which found Japan at fault for disturbing the peace. Japan defiantly withdrew from the League. The small powers in the League called for military sanctions, but the Great Powers, knowing that they would bear the burden of military intervention against Japan, and in any case inclined to see no threat to their own immediate security, refused to take any stronger measures. The Japanese remained in occupation of Manchuria and northeast China. With the Japanese conquest of Manchuria one tributary of the coming military torrent had begun to flow. But the world at this time was also stunned by economic depression.

Each government was preoccupied with its own internal social problems.

99. THE GREAT DEPRESSION: COLLAPSE OF THE WORLD ECONOMY

The capitalist economic system was a delicate and interlocking mechanism in which any disturbance was rapidly transmitted with accelerating impact through all the parts. For many basic commodities prices were determined by the free play of supply and demand in a worldwide market. There was much regional division of labor; large areas lived by producing a few specialized articles for sale to the world as a whole. A great deal of production, both local and international, especially in the 1920s, was financed by credit, that is, by promises of repayment in the future. The system rested upon mutual confidence in the processes of mutual exchange—on the belief of lenders, creditors, and investors that they would get their money back and on the belief of borrowers that they could pay their debts. This vast interlocking system also depended on the ability of farms and factories to market their products at prices high enough to bring a net return, so that fanners and factory people might purchase the output of other factories and farms—all this round and round in countless circles of mutual interdependence and throughout the world as a whole.

The Prosperity of the 1920s and Its Weaknesses

The five years after 1924 were a period of prosperity in that there was a good deal of international trade, building, and development of new industries. The automobile, for example, still an oddity in 1914, became an article of mass production after the war. Its widespread use increased the demand for oil, steel, rubber, and electrical equipment, caused the building of tens of thousands of miles of roads, and created whole new occupations for truck-drivers, garage mechanics, and filling-station attendants. Similarly the new mass popularity of radios and movies had repercussions in all directions. The economic expansion was most phenomenal in the United States, but almost all countries enjoyed it in greater or lesser degree. “Prosperity” became a magical term, and some thought that it would last indefinitely, that the secret of human plenty and of progress had been found, and that science and invention were at last realizing the hopes of ages.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1911-1935

                 Revolution in China ends the Qing (Manchu) Dynasty
January 1919     Spartacist attempt at proletarian revolution is suppressed in Berlin
July 1919        Weimar Republic is established in Germany
1919             Gandhi launches campaign in India for independence from Britain
1922             Germany and the Soviet Union agree to diplomatic relations in Treaty of Rapollo
1923             French occupation of the Ruhr Valley and ruinous German inflation
1923             Turkish Republic is established under the leadership of Kemal Atatürk, who launches modernizing reforms
1925             Treaties at Locarno recognize the postwar European national borders
1925             Reza Khan becomes shah of Iran and seeks to curb British and other foreign concessions
1925             Death of Sun Yat-sen is followed by conflicts between Nationalists and Communists in China
October 1929     Stock market crash in New York leads to the Great Depression
1931-1932        Japanese forces expand control of Manchuria
1932             Governments respond to economic crisis with national protectionism
1932-1939        Writers respond to social crisis with new “social realism”
1934-1935        Chinese communists make the 6,000-mile Long March

But there were weaknesses in this prosperity, various imperfections in this or that gear or valve of the mechanism, flaws which, under stress, were to bring the whole intricate structure to a halt. The expansion was largely financed by credit, or borrowing. Laboring people received less than a proportionate share; wages lagged behind profits and dividends; mass purchasing power, even when inflated by installment buying (another form of credit), was inadequate to pay for the vast output that it was technically possible to produce. And throughout the world the whole decade of the 1920s was a time of chronic agricultural depression, so that farmers could neither pay their debts nor purchase manufactures to the degree required for the smooth functioning of the system.

Military operations in the First World War had reduced wheat fields under cultivation in Europe by a fifth. The world price of wheat went up, and farmers in the United States, Canada, and elsewhere increased their acreage. Often, to acquire land at high prices, they assumed mortgages which in later years they were unable to repay. After the war Europe restored its wheat production, and eastern Europe reentered the world market. Agriculture everywhere was increasingly mechanized, and farmers rapidly increased their output of wheat by using a tractor-drawn harvester-thresher combine. At the same time dry farming opened up new land, and science increased the yield per acre. The result of all these agricultural developments was a superabundant output of wheat. But the demand for wheat was what economists call “inelastic.” By and large, within the area of the Western world, people already ate as much bread as they wanted and would buy no more; and the undernourished masses of Asia, who in pure theory could have consumed the excess, could not pay even low costs of production or transportation. The world price of wheat fell incredibly. In 1930 a bushel of wheat, in terms of gold, sold for the lowest price in 400 years.

Wheat growers in all continents were faced with ruin. Growers of many other crops faced the same dismal prospect. Cotton and com, coffee and cocoa all collapsed. Brazilian and African planters were caught by overproduction and falling prices. In Java, where the acreage in sugar had been extended and the unit yield from the sugar cane had also multiplied ten times under scientific cultivation over the past century, prices bottomed out of the world market. There were indeed other and more profitable forms of agricultural production—for example, in oranges and eggs, of which world consumption was steadily growing. But the coffee planter could not shift to eggs, nor the Iowa farmer to oranges. Not to mention the requirements of climate, the ordinary farmer or peasant lacked the capital, the special knowledge, or the access to refrigerated transportation that these newer branches of agriculture demanded. For the one thing that the average farmer or peasant knew how to do—grow wheat and other cereals—the new wonderful world of science and machinery had little place.

The acute phase of the Great Depression, which began in 1929, was made worse by this chronic background of agricultural distress, since there was no reserve of purchasing power on the farms. The farmer’s plight became even worse when city people, struck by depression in industry, cut down their expenditures for food. Agricultural depression, rather than industrial depression, was at the root of widespread troubles in the inter-war years throughout eastern Europe and the colonial world.

The Crash of 1929 and the Spread of Economic Crisis

The depression, in the strict sense, began as a stock market and financial crisis. Prices of stocks had been pushed upward by years of continuing expansion and high dividends. At the beginning of 1929 prices on the European stock exchanges began to weaken. But the real crisis, or turning point, came with the crash on the New York Stock Exchange in October 1929. Here values had been driven to fantastic heights by excessive speculation. Not only professional speculators, but quite ordinary people bought stock with borrowed funds. Often trading on “margin,” they “owned” five or ten times as much stock as the amount of their own money put into it; the rest they borrowed from-brokers, and the brokers borrowed from banks, the purchased stock in each case serving as collateral. With money so easy to obtain, people pushed up American stock prices by bidding against each other and enjoyed huge fortunes on paper; but if prices fell, even a little, the hapless owners would be obliged to sell their stock to pay off the money they had borrowed. Hence the weakening of values on the New York Stock Exchange set off uncontrollable tidal waves of selling, which drove stock prices down irresistibly and disastrously. In a month stock values dropped by 40 percent, and in three years, from 1929 to 1932, the average value of 50 industrial stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange dropped from 252 to 61. In these same three years 5,000 American banks closed their doors.

The crisis passed from finance to industry and from the United States to the rest of the world. The export of American capital came to an end. Americans not only ceased to invest in Europe but sold the foreign securities that they had. This pulled the foundations from under the postwar revival of Germany and hence indirectly of much of Europe. Americans, their incomes falling, ceased to buy foreign goods; people everywhere saw their American markets slip away, and prices tumbled. In 1931 the failure of a leading Vienna bank, the Creditanstalt, sent a wave of shivers, bankruptcies, and business calamities over Europe. Everywhere business firms and private people could not collect what was owed them or even draw on money that they thought they had in the bank. They could not buy, and so the factories could not sell. Factories slowed down or closed entirely. Between 1929 and 1932, the latter year representing the depth of the depression, world production is estimated to have declined by 38 percent, and the world’s international trade fell by two-thirds. In the United States national income fell from $85 billion to $37 billion.

Unemployment, a chronic disease ever since the war, assumed the proportion of a plague. In 1932 there were 30 million unemployed persons reported in the world; and this figure did not include the further millions who could find work only for a few hours in the week, or the masses in Asia or Africa for whom no statistics were to be had. The worker’s wages were gone, the farmer’s income touched bottom; and the decline of mass purchasing power forced more idleness of machinery and more unemployment. People in the prime of life spent years out of work. Young people could not find jobs or establish themselves in an occupation. Skills and talents of older people grew rusty. Millions were reduced to living and supporting their families on the pittances of charity, doles, or relief. Great modern cities saw an outburst of sidewalk art, in which jobless able-bodied men drew pictures on the pavement with colored chalk, in the hope of attracting a few sixpence or dimes. People were crashed in Spirit by a feeling of uselessness; months and years of fruitless job hunting left them demoralized, bored, embittered, and resentful. Never had there been such waste, not merely of machinery which now stood idle but also of the trained and disciplined labor force on which all modern societies were built. And people chronically out of work turned to new and disturbing political ideas.

Political and Economic Reactions to the Crisis

Optimists at the time, of whom President Herbert Hoover in the United States was one, declared that this depression, though a severe one, was basically only another periodic low point in the business cycle, or alternation of expansion and contraction, which had ebbed and flowed in the Western world for over a century. Prosperity, they blithely said, was “just around the comer.” Others came to believe that the crisis represented the breakdown of the whole system of capitalism and free private enterprise. These people in many cases looked for signs of the future in the planned economy then being introduced in the U.S.S.R. There was some truth in both views. After 1932, in part for purely cyclical reasons—because the depression cut down indebtedness and reduced the costs of doing business—it again became possible to produce and sell. World steel production, for example, which had stood at 121 million tons in 1929, and then collapsed to 50 million in 1932, by 1936 again reached 122 million. To a considerable degree, to be sure, revival was due to rearmament. On the other hand, the Great Depression did put an end to some aspects of the older free-market economic system. Even if such a stricken economy had internal powers of full recuperation, people would not stand for such terrifying insecurity in their personal lives. The horrors of mass unemployment were long remembered.

All governments took new steps to provide work and incomes for their people. All in one way or another strove to free themselves from dependency on the uncertainties of the world market. The interlocking world economy collapsed both from the depression itself and from the measures adopted to cure it. One of the most marked economic consequences of the depression was a strong movement toward economic nationalism— toward greater self-sufficiency within the sphere which each government could hope to control.

The internationalism of money, the gold standard, and the free convertibility of currencies were gradually abandoned. Countries specializing in agricultural exports were among the first to be pinched. Agricultural prices were so low that even a large quantity of exports failed to produce enough foreign currency to pay for needed imports; hence the exporting country’s currency fell in value. The currencies of Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Australia, and New Zealand all depreciated in 1929 and 1930. Then came the turn of the industrial countries. England, also, as the depression went on, could not sell enough exports to pay for imports. It had to pay for imports in part by sending gold out of the country; thus the gold reserve supporting the pound sterling declined, and people who had pounds sterling began to convert their pounds into dollars or other currencies for which they thought the gold basis was more secure. This was known, in the poetic language of economics, as the “flight from the pound.” In 1931 Great Britain went off the gold standard, which is to say that it devalued the pound. But after Britain devalued, some 20 odd other countries, to protect their own exports and their own industries, did the same. Hence somewhat the same relative position reappeared. Even the United States, which possessed most of the world’s gold supply, renounced the gold standard and devalued the dollar in 1934. The purpose was mainly to help American farmers; with dollars cheaper in terms of foreign currencies, foreigners could afford to buy more American agricultural products. But it became harder for foreigners to sell to the United States.

Hence the depression, adding its effects to those of the World War and postwar inflation, led to chaos in the international monetary exchanges. Governments manipulated their currencies to uphold their sagging exports. Or they imposed exchange controls, which required that foreigners from whom their own people purchased, and to whom they gave their own currency, should use this currency to buy from them in return. Trade, which had been multilateral, became increasingly bilateral. Where Brazilian importers of steel, for example, had formerly bought steel wherever they wished at the prices or quality they preferred, they now had to obtain steel, often regardless of price or precise quality, from a country to which Brazil had sold enough of its own products to make payment possible. Sometimes, notably in the relations between Germany and East European countries in the 1930s, bilateralism degenerated into actual barter. The Germans would exchange a certain number of cameras with Yugoslavia in return for a certain number of pigs. In such cases the very conception of a market disappeared.

Currency control was one means of keeping one’s own factories from idleness by holding or capturing export markets in time of depression. Another way of keeping one’s own factories going was to shut out competitive imports by the old device of protective tariffs. The United States enacted the unprecedentedly high Hawley-Smoot tariff in 1930, which soon contributed to the further decline of international trade. Other countries, equally or more distressed, now could sell less to America and hence buy fewer American goods. Other countries likewise raised their own tariffs in the desperate hope of reserving national markets for their own people. Even Great Britain, citadel of free trade in the nineteenth century, turned to protectionism. It also revived and adopted Joseph Chamberlain’s old idea of an imperial tariff union. In 1932, by the Ottawa agreements, Britain and the British dominions adopted a policy of lower tariffs against one another and higher tariffs against the rest of the world.

Even tariffs were not always enough for economic nationalists. Quotas or quantitative restrictions were adopted in many nations. By this system a government said in effect not merely that goods brought into the country must pay a high tariff duty but that above a certain amount no goods could be brought in at all. Increasingly both importers and exporters worked under government licenses, in order that a country’s entire foreign trade could be centrally planned and managed.

Thus the world economy disintegrated into fiercely competing national economic systems. In the oceanic wreckage of the Great Depression, each state tried to create an island of economic security for its own people. Some efforts were made to break down the rising barriers. An International Monetary and Economic Conference, meeting in London in 1933, attempted to open the clogged channels of world trade; it ended in failure, as did attempts to stabilize the exchange rates of various currencies. Soon thereafter, the wartime Allies defaulted on their postwar debt payments to the United States. Legislation in Congress then denied them the right to float bonds or obtain new loans in the American securities market. American actions thus reinforced economic nationalism. The era that had opened with Woodrow Wilson’s dream of international economic cooperation was ending with an unprecedented intensification of economic rivalry and national self-centeredness; it was only one of the promises of the postwar world to be blasted by the Great Depression.

Cultural Reactions to the Crisis

The effects of the economic crisis spread to the cultural and intellectual life of the 1930s. Responding to the despair and social dislocation of the masses of unemployed, artists and writers turned to describing painful social realities and committed themselves to political activism.

All this was in contrast to the 1920s. The postwar decade had been a period of great achievement in what is generally called “modernist” art and literature. Painters projected disjointed dreamlike scenes evoking their personal memories or disorienting personal experiences and writers emphasized their own personal vision and the innermost lives of the characters whom they depicted. These writers were responsible for remarkable explorations of memory, time, and the internal workings of the human mind. The Irish writer James Joyce published his famous novel Ulysses portraying the life and thoughts of its leading character during a single day in Dublin, contributing with it to a new literary fascination with interior monologues and “stream of consciousness” writing, which was soon followed by the dramas of the American playwright Eugene O’Neill. The French novelist Marcel Proust developed lengthy descriptions of personal and emotional experiences in his multivolume Remembrance of Things Past, and the English writer Virginia Woolf examined the complex passage of time through the characters she created in novels such as To the Lighthouse. A generation of American writers, including Gertrude Stein and Ernest Hemingway, had even settled in Paris after the First World War to pursue experimental forms of literature and art. The political and social world by no means disappeared from “modernist” literature, but these writers were more concerned with exploring the inner complexities of human psychology.

Now, under the harsh economic conditions of the 1930s, it became common to reject the literary exploration of psychological anxieties as inadequate or even as self-indulgent. A new kind of “realist” literature and a literature of political engagement won support from intellectuals in all industrial societies, especially among those who believed that the Great Depression had grown out of fundamental flaws and injustices in the capitalist economy. Some writers, like the French novelist André Gide, as well as some poets, artists, and film-makers, temporarily embraced communism and praised the social experiments of the Soviet Union. Others simply decided that they should set aside the arcane language of the literary avant-garde and write about the social suffering of the day. A new genre of proletarian literature came into being. Many who had settled in Paris returned to the United States in the early 1930s. As the American critic Malcolm Cowley noted in his Exile’s Return, the new social problems called for new kinds of writing. Where Ulysses was a classic modernist work of the 1920s, John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath may be seen as a classic “social novel” of the 1930s. Steinbeck wrote about the social miseries of America’s impoverished, displaced farmers rather than the personal memories of an alienated intellectual. His themes and those elaborated by others exemplified the cultural anxiety that spread across the world in the wake of the unprecedented economic crisis. Meanwhile, the anxiety that fostered a new literary and artistic “realism” also contributed in very different ways to the rise of an angry political extremism, which, as we shall see, was now attracting new support in Europe, the United States, and other parts of the world.