Chapter 15

EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION, 1871-1914: SOCIETY AND CULTURE

74. The Advance of Democracy: Socialism, Labor Unions, and Feminism

75. Science, Philosophy, the Arts, and Religion

76. The Waning of Classical Liberalism

The belief in progress has been at the center of modern thought since the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth century. Although some romantic poets, conservatives, and socialists questioned the consequences of modern technologies and industry, most people in the nineteenth century assumed that progress was both inevitable and beneficial. Liberals were especially optimistic about progressive developments in all the main spheres of modern life: scientific knowledge, technological inventions, economic expansion, constitutional government, and protection for fundamental human rights. But the liberals were by no means alone in seeing the late nineteenth-century European ascendancy as the historical confirmation of human progress.

There were also many Europeans, however, who believed that whole groups of human beings were denied the benefits of modern civilization, that workers were not receiving their rightful share of modern wealth, or that women were not entering their rightful place in modern political life. The popular new political movements in these decades were therefore convinced that they were on the side of progress, and in fact they were often able to gain new rights or benefits for the groups they represented.

Meanwhile, science itself continued to produce advances in both the theoretical understanding of nature and the technological inventions that were transforming modern societies. Yet it was also at this time that various thinkers began to question the certitudes of scientific knowledge and to stress the limits of human reason, thus challenging many of the cultural assumptions that sustained the popular belief in human progress. These new trends in European intellectual life before 1914 began to erode some of the confidence in the progressive evolution of human history (at least among certain philosophers or artists) and to undermine the optimism of classical liberalism. The idea of progress remained a powerful theme in all modern cultures, but by the early twentieth century the limits and consequences of progress were also becoming subjects for historical reflection, artistic representation, and cultural debate.

74. THE ADVANCE OF DEMOCRACY: SOCIALISM, LABOR UNIONS, AND FEMINISM

The artisan and laboring classes had always been suspicious of “bourgeois” liberalism’s optimistic view of free competition, unrestrained private enterprise, the Manchester School, laissez-faire, the laws of supply and demand, the free market for goods and labor, and the idea of an economy independent of states and governments. These were the ideas of middle-class liberals, not of radical democrats. Popular leaders had opposed them in the French Revolution in 1793. The English Chartists had been outspokenly anticapitalistic, and on the Continent the ideas of socialism had been spreading. In 1848 there was a strong movement among the working classes for a “social” republic, and, though the social revolution failed in 1848, the force of it was enough to terrify the possessing classes and shape the philosophy of Karl Marx. With the advent of the ballot, workers pressed for social legislation and used their political power to gain a greater measure of social democracy.

But in addition, before and after obtaining the ballot, working people resorted to other devices for the improvement of their position. Against the owners of capital, who controlled the giving of jobs, there were two principal lines of action. One was to abolish the capitalists; the other, to bargain with them. The former led to radical forms of socialism; the latter, to the formation of labor unions. Socialism, in logic, meant the extinction of the private employer as such, or at least to the dissolution of the larger capitalist corporations. Trade unionism, in logic, meant that the workers had every reason to keep their employers prospering in business in order that bargaining with them might produce better economic results. The working-class movement thus contained an internal contradiction which was never completely resolved.

Middle-class and educated people who took up the workers’ cause, the “intellectuals” of the movement—Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Louis Blanc, Ferdinand Lassalle, and thousands of less famous names—tended more to socialism than to unionism. They thought of society as a whole, they saw the economy as a complex social system, they thought of the future in long-run terms, and their time scale allowed generously for whole historical epochs to come and go. The actual workers, put to work at an early age, barely educated if at all, with the waking hours of their adult lives spent on manual jobs, were inclined to keep their attention more on unionism than on socialism. To earn a shilling more every week beginning next week, to be spared the nervous strain and physical danger of constant exposure to unprotected machinery, to have 15 minutes more every day for lunch, were likely to seem more tangible and important than far-reaching but distant plans for a reconstructed society. The worker looked on the intellectual as an outsider, however welcome; the intellectual looked on the worker as shortsighted and timid, however much in need of help.

After the failures of 1848 the socialist and trade union movements diverged for a generation. The 1850s, compared with the hungry ‘40s, were a time of full employment, rising wages, and increasing prosperity for all classes. Workers set to organizing unions, socialist thinkers to perfecting their doctrines.

The Trade Union Movement and Rise of British Labor

Organizations of wage workers, or labor unions in the modern sense (as distinguished from medieval craft guilds), had long maintained a shadowy and sporadic existence. But they had always been extralegal, frowned upon or actually prohibited by governments. French revolutionaries in the Le Chapelier Act of 1791 and British Tories in the Combination Act of 1799 had been as one in forbidding workers to unite. It was the rise of “bourgeois” liberalism, so insensitive to the worker in most ways, that first gave legal freedom to labor unions. The British unions received a tacit recognition from the Liberal Tories in 1825 and explicit recognition from Gladstone’s Liberal ministry in 1871. French unions were recognized by Napoleon III in 1864, then restrained in the reaction caused by the Commune, then fully legalized in 1884. In Germany Bismarck negotiated with labor leaders to find support against the vested interests that stood in his way.

The prosperity of the 1850s favored the formation of unions, for workers can always organize most easily when employers are most in need of their services. The craft union— or union of skilled workers in the same trade, such as carpenters—was at first the typical organization. It was most fully developed in England, where a “new model” unionism was introduced by the Amalgamated Society of Engineers (i.e., machinists) in 1851. It was the policy of the “new model” union officials to take the unions out of politics, to forget the semisocialism of the Chartists, to abandon Robert Owen’s grandiose idea of “one big union” for all workers, and to concentrate on advancing the interests of each separate trade. The new leaders proposed to be reasonable with employers, avoid strikes, accumulate union funds, and build up their membership. In this they were successful; the unions took root; and the two governing parties in England, reassured by the unexpected moderation of working-class representatives, combined to give the town worker the vote in 1867.

In the 1880s, and especially with the great London dock strike of 1889, which closed the port of London for the first time since the French Revolution, unions of unskilled workers began to form. Industrial unionism, or the joining in one union of all workers in one industry, such as coal or transportation, regardless of the skill or job of the individual worker, began to take shape at the same time. In some cases the older skilled unionists joined with unskilled laborers who worked beside them. By 1900 there were about 2,000,000 union members in Great Britain, compared with only 850,000 in Germany and 250,000 in France.

It was largely because British workers were so far advanced in trade unionism, and SO successful in forcing collective bargaining upon their employers, that they were much slower than their Continental counterparts in forming a workers’ political party. By the 1880s, when avowed socialists were already sitting in French, Belgian, and German parliaments, the only corresponding persons in Britain were a half-dozen “Lib-Labs,” as they were called, laboring men elected on the Liberal ticket. The British Labour party was formed at the turn of the century by the joint efforts of trade union officials and middle-class intellectuals. Where on the Continent the labor unions were often led, and even brought into being, by the socialist political parties, in Britain it was the labor unions that brought into being, and subsequently led, the Labour party. The influence of British labor unions made the Labour party less socialistic than working-class parties on the Continent. Its origin and rapid growth were due in large measure to a desire to defend the unions as established and respectable institutions.

The unions were threatened in their very existence by a ruling of the British courts in 1901, the Taff Vale decision, which held a union financially responsible for business losses incurred by an employer during a strike. The shortest and most orderly strike, by exhausting a union’s funds, might ruin the union. Opposition to the Taff Vale decision unified the unions and all other existing labor and socialist organizations and precipitated the formation of the modern Labour party. In the election of 1906 the new Labour party sent 29 members to Parliament, which thereupon overruled the Taff Vale decision by new legislation. The social legislation put through Parliament by the Liberal party government in the next few years, in good part under pressure from labor, has been described in the last chapter.

European Socialism after 1850

As for socialism, which had so frightened the middle and upper classes in 1848, it seemed in the 1850s to go into abeyance. Karl Marx, after issuing the Communist Manifesto with Engels in 1848, and agitating as a journalist in the German revolution of that year, withdrew to the secure haven offered by England, where, after years of painstaking research, he published the first volume of his Capital in 1867. This work, of which the succeeding two volumes were published after his death, gave body, substance, and argument to the principles announced earlier in the Communist Manifesto. Marx, during more than 30 years in London, scarcely mixed with the labor leaders then building up the English unions. Hardly known to the English, he associated mainly with political exiles and temporary visitors of numerous nationalities. The first volume of Capital was not even published in English until 1886.

In 1864 there took place in London the first meeting of the International Working Men’s Association, commonly known as the First International. It was sponsored by a heterogeneous group, including the secretary of the British carpenters’ union, Robert Applegarth; the aging Italian revolutionary, Mazzini; and Karl Marx. With the union officials absorbed in union business, leadership in the Association gradually passed to Marx, who used it as a means of publicizing the ideas about to appear in his Capital. At subsequent annual congresses, at Geneva, Lausanne, Brussels, and Basel, Marx built up his position. He made the Mazzinians unwelcome, and he denounced the German Lassalleans for their willingness to cooperate with Bismarck, arguing that it was not the business of socialists to cooperate with the state but to seize it. His sharpest struggle was with the Russian Bakunin. Drawing on his experience in tsarist Russia, Bakunin viewed the state as the cause of the worker’s afflictions; he was hence an “anarchist,” holding that the state should be attacked and abolished. To Marx anarchism was abhorrent; the correct doctrine was that the state—tsarist or bourgeois—was a product of economic conditions and a weapon of the propertied interests, so that the true target for revolutionary action must be not the state but the capitalist economic system. Marx drove Bakunin from the International in 1872.

Meanwhile members of the First International watched with great excitement the Paris Commune of 1871, which they hoped might be the opening act of a European working-class upheaval. Members of the International infiltrated the Commune, and the connection between the two, though rather incidental, was one reason why the French Provisional Government repressed the Commune with such terrified ferocity. But the Commune actually destroyed the First International. The Commune had been bloody and violent, an armed rebellion against the democratically elected National Assembly of France. Marx praised it as a stage in the international class war. He even saw in it a foretaste of what he was coming to call the “dictatorship of the proletariat.” He thus frightened away many possible followers. Certainly British trade unionists, sober and steady individuals, could have nothing to do with such doings or such doctrines. The First International faded out of existence after 1872.

But in 1875, at the Gotha conference, Marxian and Lassallean socialists united to found the German Social Democratic party, whose remarkable growth thereafter, against Bismarck’s attempts to stop it, has already been noted. About 1880 socialist parties sprouted in many countries. In Belgium, highly industrialized, a Belgian Socialist party appeared in 1879. In the industrial regions of France some workers were attracted to Jules Guesde, a self-taught worker, former Communard, and now a rigid Marxist, who held it impossible to emancipate the working class by compromise of any sort; others followed Paul Brousse, who thought it possible for workers to arrive at socialism through parliamentary methods; still others supported Jean Jaurès, who eloquently linked social reform to the French revolutionary tradition and the defense of republican institutions. Not until 1905 did the socialist groups in France form a unified Socialist party. In England, in 1881, H. M. Hyndman founded a Social Democratic Federation on the German model and with a Marxist program; it never had more than a handful of members. In 1883 two Russian exiles in Switzerland, Plekhanov and Axelrod, recent converts to Marxism, founded the Russian Social Democratic party, from which the communism of the following century was eventually to be derived. The socialist parties all came together to establish an international league in 1889, known as the Second International, which thereafter met every three years and lasted until 1914.

Revisionist and Revolutionary Socialism, 1880-1944

The new socialist parties of the 1880s were all Marxist in inspiration. Marx died in 1883. Marxism or “scientific socialism,” by the force of its social analysis, the mass of Marx’s writings over 40 years, and an attitude of unyielding hostility to competing socialist doctrines, had become the only widely current form of systematic socialism. Strongest in Germany and France, Marxism was relatively unsuccessful in Italy and Spain, where the working class, less industrialized anyway, more illiterate, unable to place its hopes in the ballot, and habituated to insurrectionism in the manner of Garibaldi, turned more frequently to the anarchism preached by Bakunin.

Nor was Marxism at all successful in England; workers stood by their trade unions, and middle-class critics of capitalism followed the Fabian Society, established in 1883. The Fabians (so called from the ancient Roman general Fabius Cunctator, the “delayer,” or strategist of gradual methods) were very English and very un-Marxist. George Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, and Sidney and Beatrice Webb were among early members of the Society. For them socialism was the social and economic counterpart to political democracy, as well as its inevitable outcome. They held that no class conflict was necessary or even existed, that gradual and reasonable and conciliatory measures would in due time bring about a socialist state, and that improvement of local government, or municipal ownership of such things as waterworks and electric lighting, were steps toward this consummation. The Fabians, like the trade union officials, were content with small and immediate satisfactions. They joined with the unions to form the Labour party. At the same time, by patient and detailed research into economic realities, they provided a mass of practical information on which a legislative program could be based.

The Marxist or Social Democratic parties on the Continent grew rapidly. Marxism turned into a less revolutionary “parliamentary socialism”— except indeed for the Russian Social Democratic party, since Russia had no parliamentary government. The growth of socialist parties meant that true workers, and not merely intellectuals, were voting for socialist candidates for the Reichstag, Chamber of Deputies, or whatever the lower house of parliament might be called; and this in turn meant that the moderating influence of labor unions within the parties was increased. The workers and their union officials might in theory consider themselves locked in an enormous struggle with capital; but in practice their aim was to gain more for themselves out of their employers’ business. They might believe in the internationalism of the workers’ interests; but in practice, acting through the parliaments of national states, they would work for orderly legislation benefiting the workers of their own country only—social insurance, factory regulation, minimum wages, or maximum hours.

By the close of the nineteenth century it was becoming apparent that Marx’s prediction of growing worker impoverishment (based initially on conditions of the 1840s) had not come true, at least not yet; the bourgeois was getting richer, but the proletarian was not getting poorer. Real wages—or what the wage earner’s income would actually buy, even allowing for the losses due to unemployment—are estimated to have risen about 50 percent in the industrialized countries between 1870 and 1900. The increase was due to the greater productivity of labor through mechanization, the growth of the world economy, the accumulation of capital wealth, and the gradual fall in prices of food and other items that the workers had to buy.

Marxism began in the 1890s to undergo a movement of revisionism, led in France by Jean Jaurès, Socialist leader in the Chamber of Deputies, and in Germany by Eduard Bernstein, Social Democratic member of the Reichstag and author in 1898 of Evolutionary Socialism, an important tract setting forth the new views. The revisionists held that the class conflict might not be absolutely inevitable, that capitalism might be gradually transformed in the workers’ interest, and that now that the workers had not only the vote but also a political party of their own, they could obtain their ends through democratic channels, without revolution and without any dictatorship of the proletariat. Most socialists or social democrats followed the revisionists. Repeatedly, but in vain, the Second International had to warn its component socialist parties against collaboration with the bourgeoisie.

This tendency to “opportunism” among Marxists drove the really revolutionary spirits into new directions. Thus there arose revolutionary syndicalism, of which the main intellectual exponent was a Frenchman, Georges Sorel. “Syndicalism” is simply the French word for trade unionism (syndicat, a union), and the idea was that the workers’ unions might themselves become the supreme authoritative institutions in society, replacing not only property and the market economy, but also government itself. The means to this end was to be a stupendous general strike, in which all workers in all industries would simultaneously stop work, thus paralyzing society and forcing acceptance of their will. Syndicalism made most headway where the unions were weakest, as in Italy, Spain, and France, since here the unions had the least to lose and were most in need of sensational doctrines to attract members. Its strongest base was in the French General Confederation of Labor, founded in 1895.

Among orthodox Marxists there was also a revival of Marxist fundamentals in protest against revisionism. In Germany Karl Kautsky arraigned the revisionists as compromisers who betrayed Marxism for petty-bourgeois ends. In 1904 he and other rigorists prevailed upon the Second International to condemn the political behavior of the French socialist Alexandre Millerand, who in 1899 had accepted a ministerial post in a French cabinet. Socialists might use parliaments as a forum, the International ruled, but socialists who entered the government itself were unpardonably identifying themselves with the enemy bourgeois state. Not until the First World War did socialists henceforth join the cabinet of any European country. In the Russian Social Democratic party the issue of revisionism came to a head in 1903 at a party congress held in London—for the most prominent Russian Marxists were mainly exiles. Here a group led by the committed revolutionist V. I. Lenin demanded that revisionism be stamped out. Lenin won a majority, at the moment at least, and hence the uncompromising Marxists were called Bolsheviks (from the Russian word for majority), while the revisionist Russian Marxists, those willing to work with bourgeois liberals and democrats, were subsequently known as Mensheviks or the “minority” group. But in 1903 the Russian Marxists were considered unimportant.

In general, in Europe’s inner zone, by the turn of the century, most people who called themselves Marxists were no longer actively revolutionary.

As revolutionary republicanism had quieted down in the Third French Republic, so revolutionary Marxism seemed to have quieted down into the milder doctrines of social democracy. What would have happened except for the coming of war in 1914 cannot be known; possibly social revolutionism would have revived, since real wages no longer generally rose between 1900 and 1914, and considerable restlessness developed in labor circles, punctuated by great strikes. But in 1914 the working class as a whole was in no revolutionary mood. Workers still sought a greater measure of social justice, but the social agitation so feared or hoped for in 1848 had subsided. There seem to have been three principal reasons. Capitalism had worked well enough to raise the workers’ living standard above what they could remember of their parents’ or grandparents’; workers had gained the right to vote, so they expected to benefit from new public policies rather than from the overthrow of their governments; and they had created political parties and increasingly powerful labor unions, all of which protected their interests and helped them acquire a larger share of the national income.

Feminism, 1880-1914

The campaign for women’s rights also became more international and better organized during the same decades that the new workers’ parties were spreading across Europe. Women received less pay than men for the work they performed in the new industrial economy, and in most places they still faced numerous restrictions on their rights to own property, participate in political meetings, vote in elections, and attend universities. The movement for women’s rights therefore continued to promote the kind of reforms that feminists had been advocating since the early nineteenth century, including more access to education and the right to vote. Women’s groups on the Continent tended to emphasize legal and social reforms rather than voting rights, whereas British and American feminists gave more attention to the campaign for women’s suffrage. But activists in all industrialized societies were increasingly drawn to national and international organizations, in part because such groups created useful networks for spreading information and political ideas. American women such as Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton joined with European feminists to establish an International Council of Women in 1888, and the growing demand for women’s rights crossed the borders of all modern nations.

Although some feminists worked to make birth control available to more women or to improve the conditions of women workers, the quest for voting rights attracted the most public attention, especially in the United States and Britain. New organizations such as the National American Woman Suffrage Association and, in Britain, the Women’s Social and Political Union sponsored petitions, mass meetings, and protests that demanded equal voting rights in both local and national elections. The suffrage movement in Britain became especially militant after the British Parliament rejected every legislative proposal to grant women the vote—a pattern of official opposition that had become a recurring theme in British politics since the 1860s. Frustrated by the stubborn resistance of male politicians, the energetic leader of the Women’s Social and Political Union, Emmeline Pankhurst, led a radical wing of the suffrage movement in a campaign of violent protests in the years before 1914. Pankhurst’s supporters and allies disrupted sessions of Parliament, broke store windows, destroyed mailboxes, and damaged government buildings to protest the exclusion of women from British elections and political institutions. When arrested, the “suffragettes” went on hunger strikes, to which the police responded by painful forcible feedings.

Pankhurst and other suffragettes were widely ridiculed in the British press and Parliament, but their campaign attracted growing support during the First World War (when the militant protests were suspended), and, as noted earlier, British women over the age of 30 finally received the right to vote in 1918. Women also gained the right to vote in Germany, the United States, and other Western nations in the early years of this postwar era. The campaign for voting rights was only one component of modern feminism, however; and the movement to enhance women’s rights in the economy, legal system, family, and education would develop new themes and new political strategies throughout the twentieth century.

75. SCIENCE, PHILOSOPHY, THE ARTS, AND RELIGION

Faith in the powers of natural science has been characteristic of modern society for over three centuries, but never was there a time when this faith spread to so many people or was held so firmly and with so few mental reservations as in the half-century preceding the First World War. Science lay at the bottom of the whole movement of industrialization; and if science gained wide popularity after about 1870, in that persons ignorant of science came to look upon it as an oracle of wisdom, it was because it manifested itself to everybody in the new wonders of daily life. Hardly had the world’s more industrialized regions digested the railroad, the steamship, and the telegraph when a whole series of new inventions began to appear. In the 30 years following 1875 the number of patents tripled in the United States, quadrupled in Germany, and multiplied in all modern countries. The scientific and technical advance was as completely international (though confined mainly to the “inner zone”) as any movement the world has ever seen. Never had the rush of scientific invention been so fundamentally useful, so helpful to the constructive labors and serious problems of mankind.

In more basic scientific thinking important changes set in about 1860 or 1870. Up to that time, generally speaking, the underlying ideas had been those set forth by Isaac Newton almost two centuries before. The law of universal gravitation reigned unquestioned, and with it, hardly less so, the geometry of Euclid and a physics that was basically mechanics. The ultimate nature of the universe was thought to be regular, orderly, predictable, and harmonious; it was also timeless, in that the passage of ages brought no change or development. By the end of the epoch considered here, that is, by 1914, the old conceptions had begun to yield on every side.

The Impact of Evolution

In impact upon general thinking the greatest change came in the new emphasis upon biology and the life sciences. Here the great symbolic date is the publication by Charles Darwin of the Origin of Species in 1859. Evolution, after Darwin, became the most influential intellectual theme of the era. Evolutionary philosophies, holding that the way to understand anything was to understand its development, were not new in 1859. Hegel had introduced the evolutionary conception into metaphysics; and he and Marx, into historical theories of human society. The idea of progress, taken over from the Age of Enlightenment, was a kind of evolutionary philosophy; and the great activity in historical studies, under romantic and nationalist auspices, had made people think of human affairs in terms of a time process. In the world of nature, the rise of geology after 1800 had opened the way to evolutionary ideas, and venturesome biologists had allowed themselves to speculate on an evolutionary development of living forms. What Darwin did was to stamp evolution with the seal of science, marshaling the evidence for it and offering an explanation of how it worked. In 1871, in The Descent of Man, he applied the same hypotheses to human beings.

By evolution, Darwin meant that species are mutable; that no species is created to remain unchanged once and for all; and that all species of living organisms, plant and animal, microscopic or elephantine in dimensions, living or extinct, have developed by successive small changes from other species that went before them. An important corollary was that all life was interrelated and subject to the same laws. Another corollary was that the whole history of living things on earth, generally held by scientists in Darwin’s time to be many millions of years, was a unified history unfolding continuously in a single complex process of evolution.

Darwin thought that species changed, not by any intelligent or purposeful activity in the organism, but essentially by a kind of chance. Individual organisms, through the play of heredity, inherited slightly different characteristics, some more useful than others in food getting, fighting, or mating; and the organisms that had the most useful characteristics tended to survive, so that their characteristics were passed on to offspring, until the whole species gradually changed. Certain phrases, not all of them invented by Darwin, summed up the theory. There was a “struggle for existence” resulting in the “survival of the fittest” through “natural selection” of the “most favored races”—races meaning not human races but the strains within a species. The struggle for existence referred to the fact that in nature more individuals were born in each species than could live out a normal life span; the “fittest” were those individual specimens of a species having the most useful characteristics, such as fleetness in deer or ferocity in tigers; “natural” selection meant that the fittest survived without purpose in themselves or in a Creator; the “favored races” were the strains within a species having good survival powers.

Darwin’s ideas precipitated a great outcry. Scientists rushed to defend and churchmen to attack him. The biologist T. H. Huxley became the chief spokesman for Darwin—“Darwin’s bulldog.” He debated with, among others, the bishop of Oxford. Darwin was denounced, with less than fairness, for saying that human beings came from monkeys. It was feared that all grounds of human dignity, morality, and religion would collapse. Darwin himself remained complacent on this score. Under civilized conditions, he said, the social and cooperative virtues were useful characteristics assisting in survival, so that “we may expect that virtuous habits will grow stronger, becoming perhaps fixed by inheritance.” Much of the outburst against Darwin was somewhat trivial, nor were those who attacked him generally noted for spiritual insight; yet they were not mistaken in sensing a profound danger.

That Darwinism said nothing of God, Providence, creative (or intelligent) design, or salvation was not surprising; no science ever did. That evolution did not square with the first chapter of Genesis was disturbing but not fatal; much of the Old Testament was already regarded as symbolic, at least outside fundamentalist circles. Even the idea that humans and animals were of one piece was not ruinous; the animal side of human nature had not escaped the notice of theologians. The novel and upsetting effect of evolutionary biology was to change the conception of nature. Nature was no longer a harmony; it was a scene of struggle, “nature red in tooth and claw.” Elimination of the weak was natural, and it might even be considered good insofar as it contributed to evolutionary development. Such conceptions of what was good or beneficial for evolutionary progress profoundly challenged traditional religious ideas about morality and virtue. There were no fixed species or perfected forms, but only an unending flux. Change was everlasting; and everything seemed relative to time, place, and environment. There were no norms of good and bad; a good organism was one that survived where others perished; adaptation replaced virtue; outside it there was nothing “right.” The test was, in short, success; the “fit” were the successful; and here Darwinism merged with the new realism, or Realpolitik, and other social doctrines which were appearing in Europe at the same time from other causes.

Such at least were the implications if one generalized from science, carrying over scientific findings into human affairs, and the prestige of science was so great that this is precisely what many people wished to do. With the popularization of biological evolution, a school known as Social Darwinists actively applied the ideas of the struggle for existence and survival of the fittest to human society. Social Darwinists were found all over Europe and the United States. Their doctrines were put to various political and cultural uses, to show that some peoples were naturally superior to others, such as whites to blacks, or Nordics to Latins, or Germans to Slavs (or vice versa), or non-Jews to Jews; or that the upper and middle classes, comfortable and contented, deserved these blessings because they had proved themselves “fitter” than the shiftless poor; or that big business in the nature of things had to take over smaller concerns; or that some states, such as the British or German Empires, were bound to rise, or that war was morally a fine thing, proving the virility and survival value of those who fought.

Genetics, Anthropology, and Psychology

Meanwhile Gregor Mendel (1822-1884), an Austrian monk patiently experimenting with the cross-pollination of garden peas in his Augustinian monastery, arrived at an explanation of how heredity operates and how hybridization can take place. Unlike Darwin, his findings, published in 1866, were ignored until 1900, when they were rediscovered and became the basis for the new science of genetics. Mendel’s ideas foreshadowed the amazing breakthroughs in the scientific study of heredity and control over genetic materials in the second half of the twentieth century and in our own day.

Anthropologists began to study the physical and cultural characteristics of all branches of humankind. Physical anthropologists became interested in the several human “races,” some of which they considered might be “favored” in the Darwinian sense, that is, superior in inheritance and survival value. Some European scientists and intellectuals in this era argued that the whites were the most competent race, and among the whites the Nordics, or Germans and Anglo-Saxons. The public became more race conscious than Europeans had ever been before. On the other hand the cultural anthropologists, surveying all manner of primitive or complex societies with scientific disinterest, seemed sometimes to teach a more deflating doctrine. Scientifically, it seemed, no culture or society was “better” than any other, all being adaptations to an environment, or merely a matter of custom—of the mores, as people said in careful distinction from “morals.” The effect was again a kind of relativism or skepticism—a negation of values, a belief that right and wrong were matters of social convention, psychological conditioning, mere opinion, or point of view. We are describing, let it be emphasized, not the history of science itself but the effects of science upon European civilization at the time.

The impact of anthropology was felt keenly in religion too. Sir James Frazer (1854-1941) in his multivolumed The Golden Bough could demonstrate that some of the most sacred practices, rites, and ideas of Christianity were not unique but could be found among numerous premodern societies and that, moreover, only the thinnest of lines divided magic from religion. Anthropology, like Darwinian evolution, undermined traditional religious beliefs.

Psychology, as a science of human behavior, led to thoroughly upsetting implications about the very nature of human freedom and rationality. It was launched in the 1870s as a natural science by the German physiologist Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920), who developed various new experimental techniques. The Russian Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936) conducted a famous series of experiments in which he “conditioned” dogs to salivate automatically at the ringing of a bell once they had become accustomed over a period of time to associate the sound with the serving of their food. Pavlov’s observations were important. They implied that a great part of animal behavior, and presumably human behavior, could be explained on the basis of conditioned responses. In the case of human beings these are responses which humans make automatically by virtue of their earlier environment and training and not through choice or conscious reasoning.

Most significant of all the developments in the study of human behavior was the work of Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) and those influenced by him. Freud, a Viennese physician, founded psychoanalysis at the turn of the century. He came to believe that certain forms of emotional disturbance like hysteria were traceable to earlier forgotten episodes of patients’ lives. After first trying various techniques such as hypnosis, which he soon abandoned, he employed free association, or free recall. If patients could be helped to bring these suppressed experiences into conscious recall, the symptoms of illness would often disappear.

From these beginnings Freud and his followers explored the role that the unconscious played in all human behavior, he himself stressing the sexual drive. In one of his most famous books, The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), he stressed dreams as a key to understanding the unconscious; elsewhere he related his findings to religion, war, education, art, and literature. Freud and Freudian ideas had great influence on the social and behavioral sciences, and a good deal of the Freudian vocabulary later entered into everyday modern language and popular culture. In its deepest significance psychoanalysis, by revealing the wide areas of human behavior outside conscious control, suggested that human beings were not essentially rational creatures at all. Although Freud identified with the scientific traditions of the Enlightenment, his theory of the unconscious called into question the classical liberal and Enlightenment assumptions about how reasonable, free persons developed, explained, and acted upon their individual interests or beliefs.

The New Physics

The revolution in biology of the nineteenth century, together with the developments in psychology and anthropology, were soon to be matched and surpassed by the revolution in physics. In the late 1890s physics was on the threshold of a revolutionary transformation.

Like Newtonian mechanics in the seventeenth century and Darwinian evolution in the nineteenth, the new physics represented one of the great scientific revolutions of all time. There was no single work comparable to Newton’s Principia or Darwin’s Origin of Species unless Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity, propounded in a series of scientific papers in 1905 and 1916, might be considered as such. Instead there were a series of discoveries and findings, partly mathematical and then increasingly empirical, that threw new light on the nature of matter and energy. In Newtonian physics the atom, the basic unit of all matter, which the Greeks had hypothesized in ancient times, was like a hard, solid, unstructured billiard ball, permanent and unchanging; and matter and energy were separate and distinct.

But a series of discoveries from 1896 on profoundly altered this view. In 1896 the French scientist Antoine Henri Becquerel discovered radioactivity, observing that uranium emitted particles or rays of energy. In the years immediately following, from the observations and discoveries of the French scientists Pierre and Marie Curie and the Englishmen J. J. Thomson and Lord Rutherford, there emerged the notion that atoms were not simple but complex and, moreover, that various radioactive atoms were by nature unstable, releasing energy as they disintegrated. The German physicist Max Planck demonstrated in 1900 that energy was emitted or absorbed in specific and discrete units or bundles, each called a quantum; moreover, energy was not emitted smoothly and continuously as previously thought, nor was it as distinguishable from matter as once supposed. In 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr postulated an atom consisting of a nucleus of protons surrounded by electrically charged units, called electrons, rotating around the nucleus, each in its orbit, like a minuscule solar system.

With radioactivity scientists were returning to an idea long rejected, the favored view of the alchemists, that matter was transmutable; in a way undreamed of even by the alchemists, it was convertible into energy. This the German-born Jewish scientific genius Albert Einstein (1879-1955) expressed in a famous formula e = mc2. From his theory of relativity emerged also the profoundly revolutionary notion that time, space, and motion were not absolute in character but were relative to the observer and the observer’s own movement in space. In later years, in 1929 and in 1954, Einstein brought together into one common set of laws, as Newton formerly had done, a unified field theory, an explanation of gravitation, electromagnetism, and subatomic behavior. Difficult as it was for even the serious-minded to grasp, and a great deal was still the subject of scientific controversy, it modified much that had been taken for granted since Newton. The Newtonian world was being replaced by a four-dimensional world, a kind of space-time continuum; and in mathematics, non-Euclidian geometries were being developed.

It turned out, too, that neither cause and effect nor time and space nor Newton’s law of universal gravitation meant very much in the subatomic world nor indeed in the cosmos when objects moved with the speed of light. It was impossible, as the German scientist Werner Heisenberg demonstrated a little later, in 1927, by his principle of uncertainty, or indeterminacy, to ascertain simultaneously both the position and the velocity of the individual electron. On these foundations established before the First World War there developed the new science of nuclear physics and the tapping of the atom’s energy. The atom and its world of subatomic particles were discovered to be even more complex than conceived of before 1914.

Trends in Philosophy and the Arts

Although some writers and artists resembled earlier Romantic thinkers in criticizing Enlightenment ideas or modern science, most European intellectuals in this period viewed science as the model for all forms of knowledge. They were drawn to positivism or to the belief that scientific methods provided the only “positive” knowledge of the world. Anything unknowable to science must therefore remain unknowable forever— a doctrine called agnosticism, or the acknowledgment of ignorance.

Herbert Spencer (1820-1903) in England and Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) in Germany were widely read popularizers of agnosticism; both also pictured a universe governed by Darwinian evolution. For Spencer especially, all philosophy could be unified, organized, and coordinated through the doctrine of evolution; this doctrine he applied not only to all living things but also to sociology, government, and economics as well. The evolution of society, he felt, was toward the increasing freedom of the individual, the role of governments being merely to maintain freedom and justice; they were not to interfere with natural social and economic processes, nor to coddle the weak and unfit. Yet, like Darwin himself, Spencer believed that altruism, charity, and goodwill as individual ethical virtues were themselves useful and laudable products of evolutionary development.

These latter views were not shared by another of the serious writers of the age, also much influenced by evolutionary ideas, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900). Drawing upon many intellectual currents of the century, Nietzsche was an unsystematic, radical thinker to whom it is easy to do less than justice. It is evident, however, that he held a low opinion of modern, democratic societies. From a background of evolutionary thinking he developed the concept of a Superman, a new kind of noble being who would create new ethical values and philosophical truths that would enable him to dominate and dazzle the multitude. Qualities of humility, patience, helpfulness, hope, and love, in short the specifically Christian virtues, Nietzsche described as a slave morality concocted by the weak to disarm the strong. Qualities of courage, love of danger, intellectual excellence, and beauty of character he prized more highly. Indeed he argued that all humans, even philosophers, were driven more by their instincts and a “will to power” than by reason or rational thought. His critique of religion revived and revised some forms of classical paganism. Nietzsche was neither much read nor much respected by his contemporaries, many of whom considered him unbalanced or even insane; but he nevertheless expressed with unshrinking frankness many implications of the new evolutionary ideas. And his critique of reason and rationality had wide influence among anti-Enlightenment thinkers both before and after the First World War.

As in the sciences and philosophy, so in works of creative imagination—literature, drama and the fine arts—the changes at the dawn of the twentieth century ushered in the contemporary age. Some writers, like Emile Zola in France or Henrik Ibsen in Scandinavia, turned to the portrayal of social problems, producing a realistic literature that dealt with industrial strife, strikes, prostitution, divorce, or insanity. New psychological theories appeared in fictional portraits of troubled characters and irrational human behavior. The new novels and plays were indeed often truer to life than the older forms of European literature. But some literary movements—for example, the symbolist poets in France—were experimenting with language in works that moved modern writing far away from the literal representation of social realities. In a sense the arts followed the intellectual developments of the age, reflecting, as they do today, diverse attitudes of relativism, irrationalism, social determinism, linguistic ambiguity, and interest in the operations of the unconscious mind. On the other hand, never had artist and society been so far apart. The painter Paul Gaugin, an extreme case, fled to the South Seas, abandoned his family and modern European life, and reveled in the stark violence of tropical colors (see Gaugin’s painting la Orana Maria in the color insert following p. 000). Others became absorbed in technicalities or mere capricious self-expression. Art at its extreme fringe became almost incomprehensible and the average person seemed deprived of a visual means (as old as the cave paintings of the Stone Age) of perceiving and enjoying the world.

The artistic movement known as Impressionism did not sever all links between painting and the external world, however, and the Impressionists became perhaps the most influential artists in late nineteenth-century Europe. Rising to prominence in the 1870s and 1880s, painters such as Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Camille Pissaro, Berthe Morisot, and Mary Cassatt rejected traditional styles of academic painting in France and turned instead to the representation of everyday life and the colorful play of light in the natural world. In contrast to earlier painters who had worked in studios and depicted scenes from mythology, classical history, or exotic cultures, the Impressionists preferred to paint outdoors and to portray the streets or buildings of modern France, the daily activities of ordinary people, or the pleasures of a modern cafe. Monet was especially adept at representing the same object in various shades of light (see, for example, the Rouen Cathedral at the top of this page, but all Impressionists used light and color rather than classical lines or themes to convey their “impressions” of the modern world. Most Impressionist painters were French and most were men, though women such as Morisot and the American-born Cassatt also produced innovative works, often portraying women in the different phases of their lives (see Morisot’s Little Girl Reading on p. 618 and Cassatt’s The Boating Party in the color insert following p. 792; another famous Impressionist painting, Renoir’s Le Moulin de La Galette is also in this color insert).

Impressionism gradually gained international influence and became the aesthetic starting point for other artists, usually called Post-Impressionists, who portrayed people and objects in novel and increasingly abstract forms and surprising colors. The works of Paul Cezanne are influential examples of the “post-impressionist” art that pushed steadily beyond Impressionism in a continuing attempt to represent the artist’s distinctive personal vision of human experience (see Cezanne’s Self-Portrait with Beret in the color insert following p. 792). By the early twentieth century, artists such as Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, and Vasily Kandinsky were painting “Cubist” or “Abstract Expressionist” works that represented natural objects and the human body in highly abstract forms and splashes of color, most of which bore little or no resemblance to what scientists might have called objective reality (see Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon on p. 619; Braque’s Composition with the Ace of Clubs and Kandinsky’s Panel for Edwin R. Campbell No. 1,1914 are both in the color insert following p. 792).

After the First World War, and on into the present, the same trends of subjectivism in the arts attracted a wider, less-skeptical audience. People read books without punctuation (or with peculiar punctuation); listened to music called atonal, composed for effects of discord and dissonance; and studied intently abstract or “nonobjective” paintings and sculpture to which the artists themselves often refused to give titles. Increasingly remote from modern industrial society, artists and their art exemplified the specialization of the modern world. Artists were no longer speaking for society or creating art for common use or enjoyment but were specialists plying their trade and pursuing their own concerns—like other specialists whose work was often incomprehensible to outsiders.

The Churches and the modern Age

Religion, too, was displaced. It was now a long time since almost everyone had looked to religion for guidance. But religion was more threatened after 1860 or 1870 than ever in the past, because never before had science, or philosophies drawing upon science, addressed themselves so directly to the nature of life and of human existence. Never before had so many of the fundamental premises of traditional religion been questioned or denied. Darwinian evolution challenged the value of Christian ethics as well as the traditional picture of Creation, and anthropologists questioned the uniqueness of the most sacred Christian tenets. There developed also the “higher” criticism of the Bible, an effort to apply to the Scriptures the techniques of scholarship long applied to secular documents, to incorporate archeological discoveries, and to reconstruct a naturalistic, historical account of ancient religious times. This form of critical, textual analysis, going back at least to the seventeenth century, now took on significant proportions and was applied both to the Old Testament and the New. In the case of the Old Testament the patient scrutiny of style and language cast doubt on the validity of certain prophecies; and in the New the inconsistencies of the several Gospel sources were demonstrated by a new generation of scholars and critics. The German theologian David Friedrich Strauss (1808-1874), one such critical scholar, was the author of a widely discussed Life of Jesus, in which many miraculous and supernatural episodes were reverently but firmly explained away as myth. The sensitive French historian and man of letters Ernest Renan (1823-1892) in a somewhat similar vein wrote on Jesus and the origins of Christianity and on the life of ancient Israel, giving secular explanations for the oldest religious stories and beliefs. Moreover, the whole tenor of the time, its absorption in material progress, kept people away from church; and the wholesale uprooting, the movement from country to city, often broke religious ties.

The Protestant churches were less successful than the Catholic in protecting their membership from the disintegrating effects of the age. Church attendance among Protestants became increasingly casual, and the doctrines set forth in sermons seemed increasingly remote. Protestants traditionally trusted their own private judgment and regarded their clergy as their own agents, not as authoritative teachers placed above them. Protestants also had always set special emphasis on the Bible as the source of religious belief; and as doubts accumulated on the literal truth of Biblical narratives there seemed no other authoritative source on which to rely.

Protestants tended to divide between modernists and fundamentalists. The fundamentalists, as they were called in the United States, in an effort to defend the literal word of Scripture, were often obliged to deny the most indubitable findings of science. The modernists were willing enough to accept science and to interpret much of the Bible as allegory, but only with difficulty could they recapture a strong sense of spirituality or urgent feeling of Christian truth. Most Protestant churches were slow to face the social problems and wholesale injustices produced by the economic system, though a group of “Christian socialists” had emerged by the early twentieth century in some Protestant denominations. Because both education and the care for orphans, sick, and mentally disturbed persons generally passed to the state, Protestant groups had less to do in the relief of suffering and the upbringing of the young. Protestantism, to the regret of many Protestants, became increasingly a customary observance by people whose minds were elsewhere. Not until after the First World War could a strong Protestant revival be discerned, with a reaffirmation of basic doctrines by theologians such as Karl Barth, and an ecumenical movement on the part of divergent Protestant churches to combine.

The Roman Catholic church proved more resistant to the trends of the age. We have seen how Pope Pius IX (1846-1878), after being driven from Rome by republicans in 1848, gave up his inclinations to liberalism. In 1864, in the Syllabus of Errors, he denounced as erroneous a long list of widely current ideas, including the faith in rationalism and science, and he vigorously denied that the head of the church “should reconcile and align himself with progress, liberalism, and modern civilization.” The Syllabus was a warning to Catholics, not a matter of dogma incumbent upon them to believe. In dogma, the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary was announced as dogmatic truth in 1854; a century later, in 1950, the bodily assumption of Mary into heaven was proclaimed. Thus the Catholic church reaffirmed in a skeptical age, and against Christian modernists, its faith in the supernatural and miraculous.

Pius IX also convened a general church council, which met at the Vatican in 1870. It was the first such council since the Council of Trent some 300 years before. The Vatican Council proclaimed the dogma of papal infallibility, which holds that the pope, when speaking ex cathedra on matters of faith and morals, speaks with a final and supernatural authority that no Catholic may question or reject. The Vatican Council, and the acceptance of papal infallibility by Catholics, was the climax of centuries of development within the church. In brief, as the world grew more national, Catholicism became more international. As state sovereignty and secularism grew, Catholic clergy looked increasingly to the spiritual powers of Rome for protection against alien forces. Much in the past 300 years had he state churches of the sixteenth century, the Jansenist movement of the seventeenth, the anticlericalism of enlightened despotism in the eighteenth, the hostility to the church shown by the French Revolution, and by liberalism, republicanism, and socialism in the nineteenth century. By 1870 the net effect was to throw Catholics into the arms of the Holy See. Ultramontanism, the unconditional acceptance of papal jurisdiction, prevailed over the old Gallican and other national tendencies that had long existed within the Catholic church.

In 1870, while the 600 prelates of the Vatican Council were sitting, the new Italian state unceremoniously entered and annexed the city of Rome. The pope’s temporal power thus disappeared. It is now widely agreed that with the loss of local temporal interests the spiritual hold of the papacy on Catholics throughout the world was ultimately enhanced. The popes long refused, however, to recognize the loss of Rome; and each pope in turn, from 1870 to 1929, adopted a policy of self-imprisonment in the Vatican grounds. By the Lateran treaty of 1929 the papacy finally recognized the Italian state, and Italy conceded the existence of a Vatican City about a square mile in area, as an independent state not legally within Italy at all.

The papacy thus gained the independence from national or secular authority deemed necessary by Catholics to the performance of its role.

Pius IX’s successor, Leo XIII (1878-1903), carried on the counteroffensive against irreligion and instituted a revival of medieval philosophy as represented by Thomas Aquinas. But Leo XIII is chiefly remembered for formulating Catholic social doctrine, especially in the encyclical Rerum Novarum (“of modern things”) of 1891, to which subsequent pontiffs have adhered, and from which various movements of Catholic socialism are derived. Rerum Novarum upheld private property as a natural right, within the limits of justice; but it found fault with capitalism for the poverty, insecurity, and even degradation in which many of the laboring classes were left. It declared that much in socialism was Christian in principle; but it criticized socialism insofar as (like Marxism) it was materialistic and antireligious. The pope therefore recommended that Catholics, if they wished, form socialist parties of their own and that Catholic workers form labor unions under Catholic auspices.

As for Judaism, the Jews were a small minority, but their condition had always been a kind of barometer reflecting changes in the atmosphere of tolerance as a whole. In the nineteenth century the basic trend was toward emancipation and assimilation. Science and secularism had the same dissolving effect upon Orthodox Judaism as upon traditional Christianity. Reform Judaism grew up as the Jewish counterpart to modernism in other faiths. Secular Jews moved away from worship altogether. In society at large, the prevalence of liberalism allowed them to act as citizens and to enter business or the professions like everybody else, freed from old legal discriminations that had been imposed on them for centuries.

Toward the end of the century two important new tendencies began to challenge or counter earlier trends that were leading to the assimilation of Jewish communities and individuals. One, a cultural and political nationalism, originated with Jews themselves, some of whom feared an assimilation that would lead to a loss of Jewish identity and perhaps even the disappearance of Judaism itself. The other countertendency, or barrier to assimilation, was the rise of a virulent new anti-Semitism, noticeable in many quarters by 1900. Racist theories, dislike for Jewish competitors in business and the professions, socialist scorn for Jewish capitalists like the Rothschilds, upper-class fears of Jewish revolutionists and Marxists, together with a growth of ethnic nationalism, which held that France should be purely French and Latin, Germany purely German and Nordic, or Russia purely Russian and Slav, all combined to raise an anti-Semitic hue and cry. In Russia there were fierce pogroms, or massacres of Jews. In France the Dreyfus case, which dragged on from 1894 to 1906, revealed unsuspected depths of anti-Semitic fury. Many Jews were forced by such hostility into a new sense of Jewish identity. The Hungarian-born Jewish journalist Theodor Herzl was one. Appalled by the turbulence of the Dreyfus affair in civilized France, which he observed firsthand as a reporter for a Vienna newspaper, he founded modern, or political, Zionism when he organized the first international Zionist congress at Basel in 1897. Zionists hoped to establish a Jewish state in Palestine, in which Jews from all the world might find refuge, although there had been no independent Jewish state there since ancient times.

Many Jews, wishing civic assimilation yet despairing of obtaining it, began to sympathize with the Jewish nationalist movement, looking to Zionism and a Jewish renascence as a way to maintain their own dignity. Others insisted that Judaism was a religious faith, not a nationality by itself; that Jews and non-Jews within the same country shared in exactly the same nationality, citizenship, and political or social outlook. On the integration of Jews into the larger community the traditions of the Enlightenment, the American and French revolutions, the empire of Napoleon I, and the liberalism of the nineteenth century all agreed.

76. THE WANING OF CLASSICAL LIBERALISM

The net effect of the political, economic, and intellectual trends described above was twofold. There was a continued advance of much that was basic to classical liberalism and at the same time a weakening of the grounds on which liberalism had firmly rested ever since the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. A third effect might be noted too. Even where the essentials of liberalism persisted, in program and doctrine it underwent important changes; liberalism persisted but the classical type of liberalism was in eclipse.

Classical liberalism, the liberalism in its heyday in the nineteenth century, went back at least as far as John Locke in the seventeenth century and the philosophes of the eighteenth. It found its highest nineteenth-century expression in political philosophers such as John Stuart Mill and in the outlook of political leaders such as William Gladstone. Classical liberalism had as its deepest principle the liberty of the individual. Man, or each specimen of humankind according to liberals, was or could become a freestanding being. “Man” meant for them any member of the human race, homo sapiens, though in practice, except for a few like Mill, they were usually thinking of adult males. The very principle of liberalism, however, with its stress on the autonomy of the individual, also contributed to the growing movement for women’s rights.

The individual, in this view, was not simply formed by race, class, church, nation, or state but was ultimately independent of all such collective identities. Individuals did not hold their ideas because they belonged to particular ethnic or social groups. They were viewed as autonomous persons who were capable of the free use of reason or of thinking matters out independently, apart from their own interests, prejudices, or unconscious drives. And, since this was the nature of rational human behavior, people of different interests could reasonably and profitably discuss their differences, make compromises, and reach solutions by peaceable agreement. It was because they thought all persons potentially reasonable that liberals favored education. They opposed all imposition of force upon the individual, from physical torture to mental indoctrination.

In religion, liberals thought each individual should adopt any faith or no faith as he or she chose and that churches and clergy should play little or no part in public affairs. In politics, they thought that governments should be constitutional and limited in power, with individuals governing themselves through their chosen representatives, with issues discussed and decided by the use of intelligence, both by the voters in election campaigns and by elected deputies in parliamentary debate. The will of a majority, or larger number of individuals, was taken as decisive, with the understanding that the minority might become a majority in its turn as individuals changed opinions. At first distrustful of democracy, fearing the excesses of popular rule, and eager to limit political power and the suffrage to the propertied classes, in the course of the nineteenth century liberals had accepted the democratic principle of universal male suffrage, if not yet the vote for women. In economics, liberals thought of the whole world as peopled by individuals doing business with one another—buying and selling, borrowing and lending, hiring and firing—without interference from governments and without regard to religion or politics, both of which were thought to impose superficial differences upon the underlying uniformity of mankind. The practical consequences of liberalism were toleration, constitutionalism, laissez-faire, free trade, and an international economic system. It was thought that all peoples would progress to these same ends, though the era’s pervasive racism and the attitudes of imperialism blocked the actual application of liberal principles to the non-European peoples who lived under European rule in old and new colonial empires.

There never was a time, even in one country, when all liberal ideas were simultaneously triumphant. Pure liberalism, like most other cultural and political ideologies, has never existed except as a doctrine. Advancing in one way, liberalism would be blocked or reversed in another. On the whole, Europe before 1914 was predominantly liberal. But signs of the wane of liberalism set in clearly about 1880; some, like the changing conceptions of human behavior and the new interest in the irrational, have already been mentioned.

The Decline of Nineteenth-Century Liberalism: Economic Trends

The free economy produced many hardships. Workers tossed by the ups and downs of a labor market and producers caught in the uncertainties of a world commodity market clamored for protection against exposure. A severe depression in 1873 sent prices and wages into collapse, and the economy did not fully recover until 1893. European farmers, both small French farm owners and big Junker landlords of East Germany, demanded tariff protection; they could not compete with the American Middle West or the steppes of South Russia, both of which after 1870 poured their cereals at low prices into Europe. The revival of tariffs and decline of free trade, very marked in Europe about 1880, thus began with the protection of agricultural interests. Industry soon demanded the same favors. In Germany the Junkers and the rising Rhineland industrialists joined forces in 1879 to extort a tariff from Bismarck. The French in 1892 adopted a high tariff to shelter both manufacturing and agricultural interests. The United States, rapidly industrializing, also adopted protective tariffs beginning in the 1860s, the earliest of all.

The Industrial Revolution was now definitely at work in countries other than Great Britain. There was an increasing resistance to buying manufactures from England, selling only raw materials and foodstuffs in return. Everywhere there was a revival of the arguments of the German economist Friedrich List, who a half-century before, in his National System of Political Economy (1840), had branded free trade as a system mainly advantageous to the British and declared that no country could become strong, independent, or even fully civilized if it remained an agrarian supplier of unfinished goods. With Germany, the United States, and Japan manufacturing for export, a nationalist competition for world markets set in, contributing also to the drive for colonies and the new imperialism described in the next chapter. The new imperialism itself was another sign of the waning of liberalism, which had been largely indifferent to colonies.

CHRONOLOGY OF NOTABLE EVENTS, 1859-1920

                 Charles Darwin publishes Origin of Species; “evolution" becomes a key theme in modern intellectual life
1880s—1890s      Claude Monet portrays the nuances of light and color in Impressionist paintings such as Rouen Cathedral
1889             European socialist parties establish the Second International
1897             Theodor Herzl organizes the first international Zionist congress
1900             Sigmund Freud develops his theory of the unconscious mind in The Interpretation of Dreams
1905             Albert Einstein introduces the theory of relativity in physics
1907             Pablo Picasso advances his new Cubist style of painting in works such as Les Demoiselles d’Avignon
1918—1920        Women gain the right to vote in Britain. Germany, and the United States

In all these respects the division between politics and economics, postulated by liberals, began to fade. A kind of neomercantilism arose, recalling the attempts of governments in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to subordinate economic activity to political ends. A better term is economic nationalism, which became noticeable by 1900. Nations struggled to strengthen themselves by tariffs, by trade competition and by internal regulation, without regard to the effect upon other nations. Workers and business entrepreneurs were now very much affected in purely economic matters by the nation to which they belonged and by the government or laws under which they lived.

It was of course to protect themselves against insecurity and abuse as individuals that workers formed labor unions. It was likewise to protect themselves against the uncertainties of uncontrolled markets that business interests began to merge; to concentrate in large corporations; or to form monopolies, trusts, or cartels. The rise of big business and organized labor undermined the theory and practice of individual competition to which classical liberalism had been attached. Organized labor, socialist parties, universal male suffrage, and a sensitivity to social distress all obliged political leaders to intervene increasingly in economic matters. Factory codes became more detailed and better enforced. Social insurance, initiated by Bismarck, spread to other countries. Governments regulated the purity of foods and drugs. The social service state developed, a state assuming responsibility for the social and economic welfare of the mass of its own subjects. The “new” liberalism, that of the Liberals in England of the David Lloyd George era, of the Republican President Theodore Roosevelt and the Democratic President Woodrow Wilson in the United States, accepted the enlarged role of the government in social and economic matters. Both Roosevelt and Wilson, and others, sought also to reestablish economic competition by government action against monopolies and trusts. The new liberals were generally more favorably disposed toward workers and the disadvantaged classes than toward business; the improvement of the workers’ lot would vindicate the old humanitarian concern of liberalism with the dignity and worth of the individual person. The welfare state with an enlarged role for government, remote as it was from classical liberalism, was the direction taken by the new liberals. Advocates of the older or classical liberalism, however, often opposed the growing power of governments and centralized authority and were apprehensive for individual liberties.

Intellectual and Other Currents

Liberalism, both old and new, was undermined also by many developments in the field of thought described earlier in this chapter—Darwinian evolution, the new psychology, trends in philosophy and the arts. Paradoxically, this great age of science found that the human being was not a rational animal. Darwinian theory implied that the human species was merely a highly evolved organism whose faculties were merely adaptations to an environment. Psychology seemed to teach that what was called reason was often only rationalization, or a finding of alleged “reasons” to justify material wants or emotional and unconscious needs, and that conscious reflection dominated only a narrow part of human behavior. Ideas themselves were said to be the products of cultural conditioning or of social power. There were English ideas or Anglo-Saxon ideas, or bourgeois or progressive or reactionary ideas. In politics, some believed that parties or nations with conflicting interests could never reasonably agree on a program common to both, since neither could ever get beyond the limitations of its own outlook. It became common to dismiss the arguments of an adversary without further thought and without any expectation that thought could overcome difficulties. This insidious “anti-intellectualism” was destructive to liberal principles. If, because of prior conditioning, it was impossible to change one’s mind, then there was no hope of settling matters by persuasion.

From the view that the human being was not essentially a rational creature, which in itself was only a scientific attempt at a better understanding of human behavior, it was but a short step deliberately to reject reason and to emphasize and cultivate the irrational; to stress the will, intuition, impulse, and emotion; and to place a new value on violence and conflict. A philosophy of “realism,” a kind of unreasoning faith in the constructive value of struggle and a tough-minded rejection of ideas and ideals, spread. It was not new. Marxism, since the 1840s, had taught that class war, latent or open, was the motivating force of history. Now Nietzsche rejected the ordinary ethical virtues in favor of personal courage and daring; and the Social Darwinists glorified the successful and the dominant in all phases of human activity as the most “fit” in a perpetual struggle for existence. Other thinkers embraced a frank irrationalism. Georges Sorel, the philosopher of syndicalism, in his Reflections on Violence in 1908, declared that violence was good irrespective of the end accomplished and that workers should believe in the “myth” of a future general strike, with its attendant debacle of bourgeois civilization, even though it was known to be only a “myth.” The function of thought, in this philosophy of the social myth, was to keep people agitated and excited and ready for action, not to achieve any correspondence with rational or objective truth. Such ideas passed into the fascism and other activist movements of the twentieth century.

Thus, the end of the nineteenth century, the greatest age of peace in Europe’s history, abounded in philosophies glorifying struggle. People who had never heard a shot fired in anger solemnly announced that world history moved forward by violence and antagonism. They said not merely that struggle existed (which would have been a purely factual statement) but that straggle was a positive good through which progress was to be accomplished. The popularity of straggle was due not only to the intellectuals but also in part to actual historical events. People remembered that before 1871 certain weighty questions had been settled by force, that the movements of social revolution in 1848 and in the Paris Commune of 1871 had been put down by the military, and that the unity of Italy and Germany, as well as of the United States, had been confirmed by war. In addition, after 1871, all continental European states maintained large standing armies, the largest ever maintained until then in time of peace.

In economic and political matters, even in England, the homeland of classical liberalism, there were numerous signs between 1900 and 1914 that the older liberalism was on the wane. Joseph Chamberlain led a movement to return to tariff protection (to repeal, so to speak, the repeal of the Com Laws); it failed at the time, but was strong enough to disorient the Conservative party in 1906. The Liberal party abandoned its traditional laissez-faire policy in sponsoring the labor legislation of the years following 1906. The new Labour party required its members in Parliament to vote as directed by the party, thus initiating a system of party solidarity, eventually copied by others, that hardened the lines of opposition, denied that individuals should freely change sides, and hence reduced the practical significance of parliamentary discussion. The Irish nationalists had long used unparliamentary methods; in 1914, when Parliament at last enacted Irish home rule, the anti-Irish and conservative interests prepared to resist parliamentary action by force. The English suffragettes, despairing of ever getting the men to listen to reason, resorted to the amazingly “un-English,” violent political actions noted earlier. And in 1911 and 1912 great railway and coal strikes disclosed the sheer power of organized labor.

Still, it is the persistence of liberalism rather than its wane that should be emphasized at the close of two chapters on European history in the half-century before 1914. Tariffs existed, but goods still circulated freely in world trade. Nationalism was heightened, but there was nothing like totalitarianism. Racist ideas were in the air, but they still had little political importance within Europe itself. Anti-Semitism was sometimes vocal; but all governments except the Russian protected the rights of Jews, and the years from 1848 to 1914 were in fact the great period of Jewish integration into general society. The laissez-faire state was disappearing, but social legislation continued the humanitarian strain that had always been an essential part of liberalism. A few advanced revolutionaries preached social catastrophism, but social democrats and working people were overwhelmingly revisionist, loyal to parliamentary procedures and to their existing states. Doctrinaires exalted the grim beauty of war, but all governments down to 1914 tried to prevent war among the great powers. And despite the skepticism of some radical philosophers, artists, and intellectuals, there was still a supreme popular faith in progress.